G'day.
Why?
Hello.
Hey, staff, why has my name changed to Greg McCallum?
Just wondering, is that you, Laurie?
Sorry, we'll change that. Bye.
Thank you very much. Much to the amusement of
Cameron.
Thank you.
Right. Have we got our next submitter, the Canterbury Mayoral
Forum?
G'day, Steve.
G'day. How are you?
Good, good.
Now, we're... This is A, is it, or B?
B.
B. Great. I'm in the right place then.
Okay. Okay, looks like we've got the Canterbury Mayoral Forum now.
Oh, up now. Yes, you have. Hello,
everybody. Yeah, tena koutou katoa.
My name-
Okay. G'day. Well, I'll just... I'll just quickly
introduce myself. I'm the, uh-
Yeah
... Grant Callum, the chair of the, of the, of the subcommittee of the
Environmental Committee.
Yeah.
We have 15 minutes with you today. Um, we have your
submission. Feel free to take it as read, and, it'd be great to leave a
bit of time for questions. A couple of my other colleagues are still coming online,
but fire away.
Okay. Well, good m- good afternoon to you all.
Um, my name is Marie Black, and I'm the mayor of the Hurunui District,
and also the deputy chair of the Canterbury Mayoral Forum, and I give my
apologies to, Mayor Nigel Bowen, who's unable to be with us
today. But I also have with me Hamish Dobbie, who is the chair of the
Canterbury Chief Executives Forum, and he's the
CE from the Hurunui District Council.
So we're both here together. Um, so thank you for your time
today, and I will take the submission as read, but I'll just take you through
some points that, we believe that, endorse the thinking
of Canterbury Mayoral Forum. Um, it'll be no surprise to you all that we
have a strong and proud record of working together, for the good of the whole
region, and, we are concerned of course
about the raft of, changes are being proposed with
the, with, with the reform packages.
Um, we can't understate, the
implementation costs of the RMA,
reaching something like $10 bill- billion, and, that is borne
by ratepayers. So they... There are some overall concerns that
we have, but, we ins- we do support the intent of the
change. Um, in regard to mana whenua and the
treaty settings, the Mayoral Forum, does not support the change from
the general provision that requires decision-makers to have regard to
the principle of the Treaty of Waitangi.
Um, w- we believe that that does risk the undermining of
partnerships that we already have in place with, our local mana
whenua,
and that we believe that we have, significant
benefit, by working closely with, our
local Ngāi Tahu, and that we have got,
um... In the past have, have worked...
those relationships, have delivered, faster at a lower
cost and reduced the litigation that when the strong partnership
approaches are implemented, implemented and that, I think
Environment Canterbury has also spoken to the US Select Committee in
that regard.Um, I'll just take you
through the implementation and transition.
So the timeline, we believe from a Canterbury Mayoral Forum was,
extremely ambitious, and that
it will create substantial resourcing and capability
challenges for many councils, particularly if we
look at that in regard to the other reform proposals that are in front of
us. Um, and the reforms, of course, will require
significant investment of people capability and ca-
capacity. This investment, should not be
underestimated. Um, if we look at
it from a spatial plan perspective, the mayoral sub- mayoral forum
supports the proposal to develop concise and consistent
national direct policy direction, and, uh...
but we need to make sure that the system will be, cost
effective and efficient, and must be in place before
local authorities commence development of their spatial
plans. Um, sorry, I'm just taking
you through the bullet points here.
Um, the mayoral forum, the bill should provide for
local authorities significant discretion to decide how spatial planning
committees will be formed, and, that we
believe that it could place some challenge,
polit- it could be politically challenging and slow in a large region
such as Canterbury. Um, the mayoral forum does not support the
minister being the final decision maker on areas that a
region cannot agree on. Um,
when we're thinking about the regulatory relief, as
drafted, we have a number of adverse impacts
for our councils and our ratepayers and our communities,
and we're looking for a greater, to qualify
some of those impacts from a financial perspective.
Um,
adding that to the rate capping de- debate, it may deter,
councils from protecting important areas because they're not in a position
to provide suitable relief.
Um,
and I guess just in closing before we open,
you may have some questions around that, we as the
Canterbury Mayoral Forum have been in a strong, position
and a strong advocate for subsidiarity and locally led
decision making. Uh, local government's role in the community must
be reflected in the resource management system.
Um, we are particularly concerned about the shift towards greater
centralized decision making. As currently proposed, the
new system, dilutes the role of elected members
as advocates and decision makers for their communities, and results
in a lack of community voice. Uh,
we do not support the system where more decisions are made through
spatial plans and combined plans, but it is critical that
communities can see themselves in these processes.
Canterbury is a large, diverse region, and within the region
its community's sense of place and identity for urban and
rural is fundamental to its ongoing success.
Regulations when thresholds are set appropriately and tested
through evidence promotes growth, enabling and shaping great
cities, townships and neighborhoods, and I'm sure that that's
what you're all seeking as far as the, the reform package
goes. Um, and we,
and we want to have those environments set where
which compliments and enhances their identity, and it's something we
fundamentally do not want to lose.
So, that was a whistle stop tour of,
of our, written submission that you have in front of you
and you have read, and, I guess that if there are
questions around that, we would be happy to receive them.
Thank you.
Thank you. I really appreciate that. Right, well, first question to Cameron Luxton.
Oh, thank you, Chair. Um, thank you to the mayoral forum.
Now, sorry that I'm only gonna focus on, three areas which don't include
Hurunui, but, I'd take this opportunity to ask you about
the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Act, and how changes to
the Local Government Act and the RMA from 2011
helped, the recovery, help, and Christchurch City
become, you know, the place that it's looking like today.
I know it only affected Christchurch, Selwyn and Waimakariri, but do you have a,
a, a view on the, the way that bill and,
and what that did, contributed to the recovery as it's seen
today?
Thanks, Cameron. Hamish, did you want to do that?
Uh, I can have a crack at it. Um, yeah, look, I think, think that,
act, really worked as a partnership between local and central
government, and, did enable things to
be done quicker, and, and got some of the red tape out of the
way so that things could get on and happen.
So I think it was, it was a pretty important enabling act to,
to, fundamental to the recovery of Christchurch.
And do you see any of the lessons from that reflected in these
bills?
Uh, yes. We, we, I think all agree in the Canterbury Mayoral Forum
that, anything that, lessens some of
the process and red tape around consenting is good for,
economic growth, so long as appropriate, checks and balances are in
place.
Thank you.
Uh, Steve Aymond-
Is Rachael, can I sup on that? Just a little-
Sure, sure. By the way, Rachael, you'll sup. Go for it. Yep.
Yeah. Did you also, make comment on the Natural and
Built Environments
Act? And would you agree that that also
reduced a lot of process?
Uh, yes. We, we would. I mean, we didn't a- actually get to see it
in action, but, but it looked like it would've, done,
done some of the same things as, contemplated hereUm, so we
see some parallels between the two.
Um, broadly we see this being slightly more enabling,
but that's just a matter of degree, I think.
Uh, Steve Adams, his question.
Right. Thank you. Uh, I got a couple, if that's all right.
But the, um-
That's all right, yeah
... the first one is, you speak on the impact of regulatory
relief on the ability of you to fulfill the
stated bill's objective. Uh, on point 64, you think the significant
fiscal compensation becomes,
associated with regulatory protection methods.
Councils may rationally retreat from these methods, resulting in diminished
protection of environmental and heritage values.
This outcome would undermine the bill's stated objectives.
Can you kind of expand on the fundamental problem of regulatory relief actually
undermining, the purported intention of the bill
to protect the environment?
Yep. Uh, certainly. Cath, do you wanna-
Yeah. No, you go.
Um, so
regulatory relief comes at a, at a cost to councils, and
ultimately that's a cost to ratepayers in the di- in the district.
So councils may choose to make trade-offs, between rates
increases to fund that regulatory relief and the
desired level of protection that we're, would wish to achieve,
for, for, heritage or environmental features
in the district. So, um-
Yeah
... it'll come to a straight economic trade-off, we believe, or potentially
believe, and things like rates capping will make that trade-off much more
stark.
I'll just have a sup on that if you don't mind, Steve. Um, the...
Just, so surely the... I mean, it's all, you know...
I mean, I get it, you, there's a potential cost for
councils. But the flip side is for landowners, if
you, if you, if you impose,
regulations on them, whether it's SNAs or,
outstanding natural landscapes and so forth, and it has a significant impact
on their business or the value of their property, surely those people are
entitled to some relief, from it, and w- which would then
mean, I would've thought that the actual decisions you make at, are ones that
community really value, because obviously the community is, which is gonna
benefit, will then have to pay, will be paying for it.
Uh, some, some of these things, will be, will be driven
by, national standards or national policy statements, and if that's the case,
then maybe the government should be paying for them rather than the ratepayers
within a district.
Well, that would depend on what the standards are, of course. Righto. Uh, Steve.
Yeah. The other point you made, eloquently already is around the
impact of removing consideration of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. Um, I wonder, it, it strikes me that this seems to be
fixing a problem that doesn't exist or rather undermining
and hampering, the beneficial way of working you
currently have with hapū and iwi, and which
is also consistent with upholding the treaty, and that seems
to be a fundamentally,
undermining thing to be doing to, the progress we've made in this
country with that relationship. I wonder if you can reflect on the
positive aspect of that relationship and why the current wording may
damage that.
Oh, I'm just going to say, you know, the,
the, the foundation of relationships actually builds
and builds the bridges that, from our past, you know.
And, I think that mayoral forum supports
the, the fundamental of having that relationship in the,
in the district, you know, that you live and
primarily on the, with the roanga that you need to be working with in that
regard.
Yeah. And you're saying there's mutual benefits there that, you know, you see it as
a fundamentally beneficial thing for everybody.
Yes. That's correct.
And, and, and just as a, as a sup on that, please, because I mean, that's
interesting compared to like I talk to a number of farmers in the, in the
area in fact, and, and when they go through consenting processes,
they, you know, the, you know, the, the, the right to farm and carry on their
businesses-
Mm
... they're feeling it's, they, they feel that the relationship at that, at that
level with iwi is, putting a lot of stress on them
working through the process, and is also leading to some very short term
consents. Um, and, and it be... And so how do
you marry those two things up?
Uh, yeah, it's a good point to raise.
Um, I guess if I can drill that back to the Herenui district, I know I'm speaking
on behalf of mayoral forum, but, the development of the relationship with
our roanga, has probably supported
and, and enabled. But, you know, we're not, we're not there yet.
We need to continue to work on that to build those relationships to get the,
the desirable outcome that we're seeking.
Okay. Thank you. Look, our time is up, so thank you very much
for yours. I really appreciate it.
Uh, appreciate your submission on behalf of the mayoral forum, and, have a
great day. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay. Our next submitter
is Tauranga City. Waiti submission
we have here from them. I understand they've just come on
now. Um,
Tauranga City.
Are we, are we... Is it Tauranga, not Te Kahu?
Hold on. Who's next? Let me have a look. Oh, sorry, Te Kahu.
Yeah, Te Kahu, I took... My fault, my, my bad. Thank you.
Now just I need to understand, please, Huhana, Steve, which of you is actually
here representing the Green Party this time?
You, Huhana.
It's Huhana here.
Okay.
I'm representing the Greens in this one.
I'll sit and then listen.
That's fine. Thanks, mate. Just so I understand. Thank you. Righto.
Bye, Phil.
Uh, righto. Okay. Look, welcome. Um, welcome to, Te
Kahu
A- A- Atonui. Um, great to have you here.
Uh, w- we've had... Your submission has been received.
Feel free to take it as read. Highlight a few points, and you got 15 minutes of our
time far away. Thank you
Oh, kia ora tātou. Um, ko Phil Grimshaw tōku
ingoa. Uh, tēnei au ki te kaitohutohu, kai o
or senior advisor to Te Kahu o Taonui.
Um,
unfortunately, our co-chairs were unavailable this morning due to some of
their scheduling issues, so, apologies from Katie
Murray and Apirana Edwards.
No worries. Yeah.
So, also, you know, like you said, Grant, we'll please take our
submission as read. I'd like to pick up on some, some key details, if you don't
mind.
Yeah. Fire away. Thank you.
So, Te Kahu o Taonui, we're, we're not opposed to
economic development, bearing in mind the historical
relationship that we have with Te Whakaputanga and Te Tiriti o
Waitangi, which
for all intents and purposes were, were mechanisms of how we reasserted
our rangatiratanga or sovereignty
and the authority to support our communities and generations to
come, whilst obviously maintaining our relationship with te taiao, the
environment.
Te Kahu o Taonui is not opposed-- oh, sorry, we are opposed to the bills
as they are currently drafted, because they will continue to marginalize our
rights and interests, and they will leave a legacy that will impact on our
generations to come. From our perspective, this is a
deliberate strategy of this national coalition-led government when it is
put into the context via some of the legislative changes,
specifically to Māori wards, disestablishment
of Te Aka Whai Ora, the Māori Health Authority, changes to smoke-free
legislation, repealing Section 7AA of the
Oranga Tamariki Act, amendments to
the Takutai Mana Act and macro-applications processes, as well
as repealing the hierarchical obligations of Te Mana o te Wai
and reviewing treaty clauses. So if you look at that in, in, in
its context,
we feel that this marginalization is, is also reinforced by
the pace and speed of this government's reforms, with little to
no consultation or engagement with your treaty partners.
And if I can just provide some examples, if we look at
information
from your officials specifically have highlighted these areas
concerned. So if we look at the Fast Track Amendment
Bill, and some of the information,
provided by your officials was due to timeframes and limited
opportunity to garner the views of treaty partners on the specific
policy proposals, this treaty impact analysis was unable to
be detailed or as thorough as would be expected for a bill of this
significance. Similarly, if we're looking at RMA or
RM Bill 1,
in light of the limited engagement and uncertain impact of the proposal on
freshwater, it was difficult to assess whether or not the treaty
principles of partnership and active protection have been met, whether or not
general engagement obligations contained in some treaty settlements have been
met, whether or not processes provided for in certain settle-settlements
have been met, implications for the Crown's commitment on Māori freshwater
rights and interests. Due to the limited time available, it
is-- You get the drift. So
you can probably understand why in the context of these
bills, we can, you can understand how we
feel, feeling marginalized in this process.
As treaty partners, we do not see that this government is acting in good faith,
and we do not support the narrowing of your treaty responsibilities within
these bills.
So
focusing on your treaty obligations just with
our post-settlement governance entities
marginalizes those iwi and hapū within Tai Tokerau
have, that haven't under-undertaken this process and gone through it yet.
So and that's another key factor for us.
One of the causal factors for the reform was around the RMA delivering poor
environmental outcomes, and there is enough data that
clearly identifies that our ecosystem and environmental indicators are
getting worse, not better. I mean, all you need to do is look at the State of the
Environment report. When was the first one? 1997?
And if you look at some of the indicators that are currently being,
provided by your ministry at the minute, things are getting worse, they're not
getting better. So for Te Kahu o
Taonui, this highlights the importance of maintaining Part 2 matters,
specifically Sections 6C, 7A, and
8, and our ability to support environmental protection
outcomes, which includes the role of mātauranga Māori or
traditional ecological knowledge that provides data and
expertise at place.
These bills are unashamedly pro-development, and from Te Kahu o Taonui's
perspective, they do not have enough environmental protections.
We should be actively restoring our ecosystems rather than focusing
exclusively on development outcomes.
Finally, from a Te Kahu o Taonui perspective,
w-we have consistently articulated that using the select committee process to
engage and consult with your treaty partner lacks no
mana, and it's a really, really poor
approach to lawmaking.
In conclusion, thank you very much for the opportunity for us to orally present,
and, I'm o-opening up for any
questions.
Uh, thank you. Uh, Huhana has your hand up for a question.
Tena koe, Phil. Otira tena koutou te Kahu o Taonui.
Uh, for those that don't know who Te Kahu o Taonui are, they represent the iwi
collective of Tai Tokerau, and so I want to acknowledge you as our
technician, Phil, coming on board to present the shared collective
view of the iwi of Tai Tokerau.
Sure.
A collective which is a mixture of settled and unsettled,
but also knowing that the RMA, really the rubber hits the
road in marae, kainga, and in hapū.
So-Knowing that you've been in the game for a really
long time, Matua Phil, you've already outlined how, how
hard it's been to even see ourselves in the legislation, and the fact
that largely iwi have come forward and said, "They've been
ignored. There has been no engagement with us in the developing of this
legislation." What would be the corrective action that you would
recommend to our select committee?
Because you, you pointed out, iwi are being treated as Joe
Public, and are being herded into this
public select committee process instead of coming in at the
devi- design stage of, legislation.
Should we pause and, look to
regroup, take on board this feedback, and mahi tahi with tangata
whenua, and what could be a, a system for resource
management that honors Te Tiriti o Waitangi?
Oh, kia ora. Oh, kia ora, Huhana. Listen, thank you very much for your patai.
Uh, the short answer is absolutely.
I mean, we've all been in different fora when
you've got people at the table working collaboratively, and, and
whilst you may agree and, and disagree on matters, you're actually working through
what they look like kanohi ki te kanohi, or face to face.
When you've got a process similar to this and similar to the other
legislative amendments that have been coming through from this national coalit-
coalition-led government, you can understand the
frustration. And for those that aren't at the
table, then
it becomes really, really hard to provide
some really helpful support and opportunities around what that might look
like. So a- as an example,
will, will scientific data
provide the environmental outcomes that, that, that we require and
we need as a community? There's a significant amount of anecdotal
information coming from right across our communities, both our
whanau, hapu, marae level community groups,
and it's that type of information that actually bolsters the opportunity for us to,
to be involved. And I think if we're choosing
to have a speed dating process around RM
reform, I, I, I think it's gonna come back and, and bite
us
intergenerationally.
Can I, can I, sup on that, Mr. Chair?
Yeah, yeah. Sure, fire away. Fire away.
Um, so what I've seen and what I've heard is
that there's, like, a new hierarchy in terms of te Māori and
how Māori enter the system and have their voices heard,
from a perspective of te kāhui tauno, 'cause, the
primary voice now seems to be those that are settled.
Um, and yet we know in the kainga, the marae and the hapu are
the ones who are activating and do the work on the ground
often. Um, the narrowing also where we see Mana
Whakahauna Aroha have a very short timeframe now to
exist. Are these all ways where it just creates
new grievance am- amongst Māori in a resource management
system that could be something more fulsome and inclusive?
Absolutely, Huhana. I mean, you know, there's a, a lot of narrative and rhetoric
around it's because of Māori and our cultural values and our
relationship with, te taiao that, that we're limiting
or we're not supportive of development, and that, like
I said, w- we, we support economic development, but
not at the expense of degrading our ecosystems.
I mean,
from any type of natural resource management philosophy, that is
crazy. Maybe I can give you an example around
something off. Um,
we're currently going through a process around rock
lobster.
Our hapu and our whanau and marae, especially gatherers when
it comes to tangihanga and, and hui, have clearly articulated that the
populations
are getting worse, yet the system necessarily hasn't picked up
on, on what that looks like moving forward.
And if you think about it, the Fisheries Act is around sustainable utilization, so
it's a, it's an economic development piece of
legislation. Um, and if we maintain
a pro-development stance within the RMA, with the reform of the RMA,
then we're gonna get similar crashes within our systems.
And, and some of those cultural health indicators are currently expressing
that right now, right now, whether it's water quality, whether it's water
quantity. So we've got all these allocation issues with freshwater
coming down catchments. There, there's significant amount of issues happening at
us, and, and I think marginalizing where,
Māori and wada communities participate in this space, if they can
participate at all,
is
seriously flawed from our
perspective.
Okay. Okay, so there, well, that's-- any other further questions?
I've got one if there's time. No, no, sorry.
Huhana's speaking on your behalf on this select committee, so
it, yep. My bad. I'll stop. Yeah. No, no worries,
Steve. Okay. Um, okay. Thank you. Okay, well, thanks very
much, Phil, for your, submission. Really appreciate it.
Um, if you-
Sorry, sorry. Grant, could I just, ask a que-
Wanna wind up? Yeah, sure.
You're our MP
Yeah
Do you have any questions of, of me in this space?
I, I'm, I've been listening carefully.
I've read your submission, and I take on board what you're saying.
But, you know, I, I do... The one thing I would say is that, being
a, a, a f- a farmer, a person of the land, I mean, we
all, yeah, we all care about our environment and trying to improve it.
And things are definitely... We've all acknowledged there's been things happen in
the past which need improving, and that's what we're focusing on, and
that's what the bill's... Well, and it's about getting the balance right between,
as you said, economic development and looking after the environment.
So that's, that's where I sit and the way I approach it.
And, and the communities do have a pa- opportunity as part of the
consenting processes to contribute to, if you're applying
for a consent to do things. Um, and your rock locks example's, an
interesting one. Um, it's, you know, it's, little
bit... It's, it... And that's, and actually there are changes being proposed to
that act to allow the minister to act a lot quicker because unfortunately
in that case, it was, it... The, the way it, it was
structured, they couldn't act quick enough, and, uh...
Which is, which is not, not acceptable. And so we're gonna look to improve that.
So, yeah. Thank you.
Thank, thank, thank you for that.
Thanks, Phil. Cheers, eh.
Okay.
You didn't like to add before we, we wind up?
Yeah. Sorry.
Sorry, Phil? Yeah.
Um, thank you for the opportunity.
I mean, you are our MP, so it'd be really good to see
you engaging more with Te Kauhanganui on, on some of these key matters
so that we're not necessarily having to going through a select committee process to
be, to be heard. I, I think there's better ways that we could manage our
relationship within Tai Tokerau.
Okay. And I always happy to talk, Phil. No problem with that at all. Catch up.
Thank you. Appreciate the opportunity, the invitation.
Ka kite.
Okay. Thank you. Right. So we'll move on to...
Now we have the Tauranga City Council.
Got that wrong before.
Okay. So, 'cause I just want me to get this from...
Uh, right. So, right. Well, welcome
everybody. Welcome to the, select committee this
afternoon, Environment Select Committee. We have, 15 minutes with you.
We look forward to your presentation.
We have, got your, submission, which
please take as read, but feel free to high- to highlight a few points and then,
then, leave, leave room for questions would be great. Fire away.
Thank you.
As mentioned, thank you very much for the opportunity for TCC to speak to this
submission. I'm Councillor Roseboom, and with me I have Andrew
Mead, head of City Growth and Infrastructure, Carl Luca, team
leader, Structure Planning, and also in the room is Councillor Rod
Taylor. We would like to provide you our support for these resource
management reforms. The RMA is simply broken, and it's not serving the
needs of New Zealand. In Tauranga it presents a major impediment
to enabling sufficient development capacity to meet current and future urban growth
requirements in our high growth environment.
In particular, we support having standardized provisions to provide
efficiency in the system and consistency in decisions, and
in the funnel approach with them narrowing down through
national instruments, regional spatial plans, and combined regional
plans. You've heard many submitters raise
concerns with aspects of the bill, such as regulatory relief
framework, iwi participation, transition timeframes, and
how these reforms are likely to be complicated by other reforms
such as local government reforms, water services, and rates capping.
Therefore, we do not see it necessary to speak to all these in
detail, but we do share these concerns and emphasize
the need for these to be addressed
to enable timely, workable reforms.
I'd like to now pass to Andrew and Carl to speak to some of the specific
technical concerns which we have raised in our submission.
Thank you.
Kia ora. Uh, my name's Carl Luca. I'm, yeah, team leader of Structure Planning
and, and, involved in spatial planning.
Uh, so I'm just gonna talk through a couple points on the regional spatial
planning. Um, so overall, Tauranga City Council is very
supportive of preparation of regional spatial plans, to
integrate with the pl- integrate the planning bill and the natural environment
bill, and inform land use and natural environment plans.
Uh, Tauranga City Council is part of Western Bay of Plenty Smart Growth,
so which comprises representatives from each of our local
authorities, Tangata Whenua, and central government, and we work
in partnership to su- set a strategic vision and
direction for growth in our subregion, the Western Bay of Plenty.
Uh, we've undertaken significant spatial planning for the subregion over the
past 20 plus years, and that includes recently
endorsing our Smart Growth strategy 2024 to
'74, which includes, a future
developments, strategy. Um, so
we're seeking amendments to the planning bill to ensure that a
subregional approach can be taken as part of the wider
regional spatial planning process.
Um, Bay of Plenty is made up of several subregions, which are all quite
different. Uh, the Western Bay, we have very high growth pressures,
while some of our neighbors, Rotorua and the Eastern Bays,
don't face these pressures as much.
Um, and providing a subregional approach to spatial planning
as part of that regional spatial planning process, so still working with our
wider regional partners, will have advantages of stronger
focus on local context, infrastructure priorities, and growth
needs. Uh, it'll also tie in nicely, with the approach to
developing land use plans. Uh, to support
timely delivery, national direction should clearly define what's in
and out of first generation regional spatial
plans. Uh, allowing a staged approach with improvement
plans, identifying areas for f- further work will help with
im- implementation in that first generation of regional spatial
plans.And enabling regional spatial plans
to, to build on work to date, to build on spatial planning to
date, such as our endorsed smart growth strategy
and future development strategy will also assist in a timely
rollout. Uh, last point on the regional spatial
plans. Uh, we support prioritising a move to the new system
alongside clear transitional mechanisms that will continue to
enable development during that transitional period.
Uh, in particular, the ability to rely on
existing future development strategies and also come into
play on regional spatial plans during that transition
period and before the land use plan has been fully developed and, and
completed. Um, and we're also very open to working with government on
other transitional tools to allow that, development
to continue. Uh, I'm just gonna pass on to Andy to
complete our sub.
Yeah, hi there. Um, I was gonna
touch on the national instruments.
So the system that is proposed relies heavily on national
instruments to provide directions to council,
councils on the preparation of plans, what that standardised
content will be, and how various resource management
matters, that conflict with each other will be
resolved. So we've had, quite a bit of
experience in working through these with MFE
staff, and other government agencies, including on the national
policy statements for, highly productive land and
freshwater management. And to be honest, we've, we've often found this
to be a significant challenge and for, I guess those
staff in, in Wellington who are, you know, have got good intentions,
they're not fully appreciating the issues that are experienced on the
ground. So as such, from our perspective, it's
essential
that the national, instruments in the new system, and particularly the
first ones that are required to inform our regional spatial
plans, our land use plans, and national natural environment
plans, are, are subject to formal
engagement, submission consultation type processes to ensure they're
gonna be fit for purpose and workable right from the
outset. Um, and that implementers of the
system such as council, you know, we feel that we're well
placed to identify issues, and find, yeah, workable
resolutions to those. So that, that's a key point for
us. Just moving on to, I guess the
functions of the new system, and particularly the distinction between
the functions of, regional councils and
territorial authorities. Um,
we support having those, those, those clear boundaries.
At the moment, there seems to be quite a bit of overlap between what councils do.
However, we think there, there remains some uncertainties and
complexities on where, certain functions should
sit. Just gonna use the example of
a-indigenous biodiversity. It's clearly like an
environmental issue, and would logically sit
with a regional council. But when, I guess
councils, territorial authorities come to plan and
rezone large scale green field urban growth areas,
they are, you know, by definition rural, part of that natural
environment, and often have significant amounts of indigenous biodiversity
in them. Um, so councils find themselves under the
RMA
having to work through those issues.
Under the new system, if that transitions to a regional council, we're
suddenly gonna become reliant on the regional council progressing changes to
their plans,
to give effect to our plans. And we just think that there are some
complexities and inefficiencies, that will,
derive from that. Just lastly, I just wanna speak about
scope, and the planning bill is quite clear that, it sets
some matters as being out of scope in terms of being
regulated. Um, and yeah, generally we
support that, but we think there are also
some risks. I'll use an example here of the, the fact that,
retail distribution effects are proposed to be out of
scope. Um, and we understand the sort of thought process
behind that around, creating mixed use
environments, making sure competition and innovation can
thrive.
Uh, but I guess equally there are, you know, sort of potential for it to result
in quite dispersed or poorly regulated retail
patterns which don't align with, say, public transport
investment, existing investment by
councils, result in land identified for other
activities, particularly residential being used for,
I, I guess retail purposes
and, and not being able to supply sufficient, development
capacity. And, and also, you know, if you,
if a, a bunch of car-based centers sort of pop up, we risk that
local communities might lose access to existing
services and centers that, that, that, that may not do well,
in those circumstances. So we're not against this,
but we think that probably the primary legislation is not the place to manage it,
and it would be better managed through secondary legislation that is
not quite, so black and white, and it provides for the
ability for some of those matters to be considered at a, a scale that's
appropriate, while still, I guess enabling the
intention, that is provided by putting it as being out of
scope. So we'll just stop there, to provide some time for any
questions that you might have. But I'd just like to thank you again for, the
ability to address you today.
Thank you. Uh, Cameron Luxon, a, a local resident of your part of the world.
I'm sure he's got a question.
Yeah, yeah, resident in the Tauranga City Council area.
Um, thank you TCC for, the submission.
I mean, you, you've talked about, the importance of what smart growth can
do sub-regionally, so I think that's quite important to take to our officials and,
and discuss those, issues. But the question I have, the
Wairakei South development, is quite
a good case study for what this bill could do, and the...
Y- I think you sort of raised it a little bit there, Andy, with the, NES on
fresh water, complications in that area being understood
by Wellington. Another one of the things that might not be understood
are, environmental risks. Uh, this committee's heard
about, safeguards for communities from the effects of
natural hazards, and Wairakei South will be
quite exposed to potential, tsunami zones.
So what risks do you think,
councils and central, ministries should be taking into
account when allowing or not allowing developments?
So I think specifically in Wairakei South around fresh
water, NESs, and, hazards from
things like tsunami.
Yeah. Well, I mean, I think, you were referring to Wairakei South, you might
also be referring to our Totara urban growth area there as well-
Yeah, Totara. Yep
... Cameron. Um, the, the, yeah,
natural hazards are a significant risk.
It is, it is coastal and, very much forefront of our mind.
Um, we're... obviously it's essential that we're planning
communities to be more resilient to those hazards in future.
I think that is the general direction of travel that is
consistent with,
with this legislation. Um, and so we're very supportive
of that. We think we can achieve that there.
I guess the, the issue of fresh water management is a real, a real interesting one.
We,
we faced some changes around, the, the national policy statement for fresh
water management, which, identified a range of what were
new, wetlands, which were really marginal and not
really wetlands as the layman would describe.
And so, yeah, we, we, we had to work through a process around 18 months
or two years to, to make some amendments to that, working
with the minister and MFAs, otherwise it was a fatal flaw
issue for our growth area. So there re- really are some significant
conflicts that we do experience, and continue to will
experience around trade-offs around say urban development and environmental
matters, and there needs to be a process to work through those.
We can't have environmental bottom lines that need to be achieved for
everything, because we'll end up with,
inefficient ability to deliver on urban growth.
In some cases, compromises really do need to be made, and in other cases, we
need to do a job of, you know, protecting or improving what we have
to, to keep that right balance for the nation-
Yep. Uh, Chair, may I just quickly sup on that?
One quick sup and then I'll get to Steve.
Yeah. Look, do you think... So, and Andrew Sh- Andy, can I take from that
that you think that perhaps, in the goals there could be,
hierarchies that, that would, you know, lay out what
must be taken into account and what, could be taken into account, for
example, in, in those, in the planning of new areas like
Totara or the, you know, Bell Road development, Wairakei South?
Yeah, I think so. And, and, and, the, the, at the moment there's the use of the
intervention sort of hierarchy. Um, so that allows in cases
for offsetting, in terms of even off-site offsetting.
So if you lose a wetland somewhere, you can replace it, perhaps replace it double
the size somewhere else. So in the end, the environment's winning and we still
achieve urban development outcomes.
Okay. Thank you. Steve Abel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your substantive submission.
I just wanted you to, expand on your comments on regulatory
relief. Um, you make it clear that you're concerned
about, the workability of the regulatory relief as currently
worded. Um, and particularly you point out that you think it's not
clear
that it's not retrospective, i.e., there might be retrospective claims on
regulatory relief. You say that amend the purpose,
to make it more workable. Do you think it is actually practically
workable, the regulatory relief idea, or do you think it would be better to get
rid of it entirely? Um, and then the final question in that regard,
as you describe, in association with the rates cap,
the current implementation of the regulatory relief would be an intoler-
intolerable financial burden to place on councils.
Yeah. Well, I mean, it's a bit unknown, but potentially that is, is the
case. Um, I think the, the key... I mean, if w- if the
regulatory relief provisions could be removed, that would probably be
the preferred outcome for council.
Right.
And certainly the two elected members in the room are nodding.
Um, I think the central issue with it though is that, the way it's drafted at
the moment, it's, the, the legislation requires us to
protect a range of, natural and, I guess cultural
features, but then it also requires us to provide regulatory
relief where we do so. So we're imple- by implementing a national direction,
we are, you know, financially, kind of hit for that.
So that doesn't seem right. Uh, it should be a situation where, you
know, where a council goes be- above and beyond,
doing what it's required to do, then regulatory relief could be a
consideration, that would be at least some sort of middle
ground, but, all on board for, removing those provisions
entirely.
Thank you.
Thank you. We've, we've h- come to the end of our time with you guys, so thank
you very much for your time. Really appreciate it and, have a great day.
Cheers. Thanks.
Very much. Yeah.
Right. We have our n- next submitters, I presume, is Waitomo District
Council. Have I got that right?
Do we have a... Yeah, mute is usually a good
thing to
work with. Is it
Alex?Can't hear you,
mate.
Now, yeah, it's, yeah, it's...
Is that working?
Yeah, got you now. Yep.
Perfect. Great. Righto. Um, it's great to have you here.
It, it... Hold on. It's stopped working again. What'd you do?
You had it.
No, no.
You had it there.
How about now?
Yeah, gotcha. Yes, yes.
All right. Sorry about that.
Okay, no worries. Waitomo, isn't it, District Council?
Yes, yes. I'll keep it brief. Um-
No, no problem. Yeah, 15 minutes with you, it's, greatly the time for
questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you. So kia ora koutou. My name's Alex Bell.
I'm the general manager for strategy and environment at Waitomo District Council,
and thank you to the chair and the members of the committee for the opportunity to
speak today. So Waitomo District Council's submission focuses on
what we consider to be an important omission in both the Planning Bill and the
Natural Environment Bill. So we're requesting the inclusion of a new goal in Clause
11, specifically in Clause 11 (1) of the Planning Bill and
Clause 11 of the Natural Environment Bill to recognize and provide for
significant natural areas that require protection but not, but do not meet the
threshold of an outstanding natural feature or landscape.
At present, the goals of the bills recognize the protection of outstanding
natural features and landscapes, however they don't adequately provide for
other natural environments that are rare, distinctive and fragile, but which may
not meet the very high outstanding threshold.
So in our district, this is a particular issue in relation to our
karst landscape, so they're better known as, as cave systems.
So I'm sure everyone's-
Yeah
... familiar with the Waitomo caves.
Um, so obviously the Waitomo District's well known for our li- limestone
landscapes, caves, sinkholes, and underground river systems.
So the karst systems are rare, extremely fragile environments, where
relatively small changes in land use can have a significant effect on
these systems. So while some of our karst systems may
qualify as outstanding natural features, much of the karst
landscapes do not meet that threshold, despite
clearly being highly significant and deserving protection.
So karst systems are incredibly important for economic and cultural
reasons to our district, so they have, obviously it has a huge, benefit to
our, our local GDP. And also culturally, they're, they're very important
to, to Maniapoto. So under the Resource Management Act, these
issues, or this issue was addressed in part through Section 7 matters, which
allowed local authorities to recognize and provide for the protection and
enhancement of important natural environments, even when they did not meet the
threshold for outstanding natural, outstanding landscapes.
So the new legislation removes that mechanism, but does not provide a clear
replacement. As a result, we consider the, the current drafting creates a gap in
the framework. Um, and
also karst systems are actually identified in other national,
environmental standards currently.
For example, the, commercial forestry NES provides specifically for
karst landscapes, which reinforces the point that karst landscapes
are widely understood to be special and fragile environments that require careful
management. So in our view, this is a, a modest but
important amendment that would strengthen the bills and address the gap that
currently exists. Thank you, for hearing
my submission today, and if there's any questions, happy to take
them.
Yeah. I'll, you know, I'll, I'll kick it off.
Well, you, what, what sort of s- were you talking about cave systems?
What do you, what are the-
Yes
... cave systems?
Yeah, so ka- so we... Karst is the technical term, for cave systems.
Yeah, k- how do you spell that, sorry?
K-A-R-S-T.
Okay, thank you. ST systems. And so the
technical t- as, as, i.e. cave systems?
Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Can I just then, 'cause
interesting, we had a pre- presentation yesterday, from
Geoscience New Zealand talking about outstanding natural features-
Mm
... which, a- as opposed to outstanding natural landscapes.
Which c-
Yeah
... do you know the, you understand the difference?
Yes. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah. Okay. Do, do you, which,
which of those are appropriate for what you're wanting here?
Both?
Uh-
A combination of both or-
Yeah, a combination of both. Yeah. It's, it's based on attributes.
Okay, 'cause... Okay. That's interesting. Okay, thank you. Helpful.
Um, Steve Avon.
Uh. Hi, sorry about that. Um,
so then for clarity, you're wanting to, for there to be some
discretion allowed to a region such as yours, where you have
this-
Yes
... very specific, phenomenon of nature-
... that is, culturally and economically important,
and ecologically important. And currently you, you're not
convinced that under that definition of, outstanding natural
landscapes that, that these karst systems are gonna be captured, so you want the
ability to say, "Hang on a minute," you know-
Yeah, so-
... "We, we are Waitomo, we are known for the Waitomo caves."
Yes. So it catches some, but not all.
So-
Yeah
... you know, some would not meet that, that definition.
And can I s- do a follow-up on that?
Sure, go on. Yeah
I mean, it's not simply the geograph- geology, is it?
It's also the ecology of those systems because they, you know,
what makes the, those, Wait- those caves in your region so
spectacular is also the, the fresh water element of them.
And so protecting the-
Yeah
... integrity of the fresh water and the ecology of the species there, the glow
worms of course, is all part of that whole ecosystem.
It's not just we're protecting this, the rock, we're protecting the whole ecology
that makes it such a, you know, f- a jewel in the crown of the country
really.
Correct. Yes.
Yeah, cool. Um, thanks Steve. Uh, Rachel.
Yeah. Also on this, hello from Dunedin.
I've never visited these caves. They sound amazing.
You, you need to visit.
Do we?
Funny.
But, but two questions around it. Um, one is if there was
a, a definition of cultural landscape, which I know there's not,
would, would the caves be covered?
And-
And the second one is, do you think, some, some wording would work
around some sort of regional significance threshold
or...?
Yeah, good question.
Um-
Yeah. So in terms of the cultural landscape, I mean, I d- I don't think so because
it, it's, it's slightly different.
I mean, these are important for cultural reasons as well.
For, for example, we've got, caves that are also
sites of significance to Māori, but it's not specifically a cultural landscape.
They have cultural importance as well because, you know, they were used for storing
things, they were used for living purposes.
Uh, but, but that's not necessarily the, the main attribute, if that makes
sense. And, and the second though is about regional
significance. Um, y- potentially, yes.
Or, or some other threshold. What, what sort of-
Yeah
... threshold would you, would you suggest?
Yeah. So it's, it's mainly like these systems are based on, dare I say it,
yeah, attributes and f- and, and things like that.
So whether they qualify for certain things.
So, I'm happy to work with officials on some sort of wording that would cover that
off or, or, or something like that.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I think that, great...
I think, you've highlighted quite a unique point-
Mm
... that, and there are these, situations I suspect around the
country where, yeah, they don't sort of fit neatly into any of
our definitions, which is effectively what you're saying here, isn't it?
Yes. Yeah.
Yeah, okay. Yeah. That's great. Okay. Any other questions, team?
Do y'all think that we've, we've had a good chat about that?
Yeah, very useful submission. Yeah. Thank you. V- quite specific. Thank you.
Unique, yeah. Okay. Well-
Now we need to make travel plans.
Yes, you should definitely make travel plans. They are really worth go and see.
Yes. It's awesome. Oh, Ryan's back.
We're, we're in the Waikato with Waitomo Caves, Ryan.
I presume you've been to the Waitomo Caves. I have a few times.
Great facility. Yeah, it's great. Very cool. Yes. Okay. No, that's good.
Okay. Look, thanks, thanks Alex. Really appreciate your contribution.
Um, and, yeah, all the best, hey? And thanks a lot.
Cheers.
Right. Who've we got next? Uh, Community
Housing Aotearoa, according to my list. Have I got that right?
Uh, greetings, Grant. Yes, thank you very much for, inviting us along
today. Appreciate it.
Okay. Look, we have 15 minutes of your time here, now,
and thank you, thank you. I appreciate that.
Um, you, we've got your submission. Please take it as read.
Uh, bri- can you give us a brief summary if you like, and then, leave some
time for questions. We much appreciate it. Fire away.
Yeah, perfect. Thank you very much.
And I think I'll be joined shortly by my deputy chief executive, Chris, who's
in our Wellington office today. So thank you very much.
Uh, by way of introduction, we are from the community housing
sector. Uh, we represent, over 100 organizations
and about sort of 30,000 odd, nearly 30,000
homes across the country. Um, we submitted on a
similar piece of legislative changes in February '22, and just went
back and reviewed our submission there as, as sort of a reminder to ourselves
as part of this process. And, and, and we're really representing
community groups from actually Rakiura Stewart Island all the way
up even north of, of Kaitaia and everywhere in between.
Okay.
And we'd argue, that housing,
particularly affordable housing for low and moderate income households, is
core social infrastructure. And so we
welcome, this legis- legislative change.
Uh, and we also support the government's direction with the
Going for Growth, and recognize
the benefits that that could bring.
But just wanted to sort of bring the select committee's attention to the
f- to the reality we've seen emerging over the last sort
of 40 years in the New Zealand housing context where the
market has limitations, and the limitations of the
market are expressed most notably in its ability to, inability to
deliver low cost affordable housing for people who are on low and
moderate incomes, who are seeing persistent unmet housing need across
the country. And, and we're all noticing that has grown in recent times.
And so we're really, in principle, very supportive of
these legislative changes, but we are also very
keen that an element known as inclusionary housing or
inclusionary zoning is incorporated in what is effectively a
once in a generation opportunity with these changes to
legislation, that are, that are on the table at the moment.
And so for those who are not familiar with it, and I, I, I have
tabled just for your information,
this report in Parliament, which has cost us many
thousands of dollars and hundreds of hours to prepare.
It's been submitted to all the party leaders in Parliament and
all the housing and finance spokespeople in Parliament.
I'm very happy to have my Wellington team drop off as many copies as you like to
the parliamentary mail service. But this is effectively a deep
dive on inclusionary zoning and inclusionary housing, which is already
a solution that's up and running in New Zealand.
It has been for 20 years operating with great success in the
Queenstown district, and, and is providing
affordable housing, a steady stream of continuous new affordable
housing through to key workers in that region, and it's also up and running
now in Hamilton as well. And so it's not a
concept or an i- or just an idea, it's actually a, a, a product that
works really effectively in the New Zealand context.
And so, in, in, in light of that, what we're
really asking you to consider is
embedding it at a national level, because the problem territorial local
authorities have is that they're left standing, last man standing when it
comes to inclusionary. And, if there was central
legislation put in place to support it, it would
accelerate and develop the scale of delivery for
everybody. And we d- we, we recommend that because we note
that there is a fiscally tight environment in New Zealand at the moment,
and what a beautiful idea using a planning instrument-
Uh, to deliver a continuous supply of new affordable housing,
when, when the government balance sheet is effectively limited or off the table
at the moment f- for that purpose. So that's the core of our submission
today. It's very focused and in the realm relevant to us, and I'm not
sure if my, my DCE has joined us yet, but I'm happy to take-
Yeah. No, Chris is there. I can see Chris. That... Yeah, he's in there.
Oh, can I hand over to you, Chris?
Oh, thank you, Paul, and, and thank you members of the select committee. Yeah.
As, as Paul had noted, you know, very supportive of the direction of travel.
And the evidence is clear that, you know, enabling more
supply is helpful. Uh, it's a necessary component of
a, of a well-functioning housing system, but it's not sufficient to deliver all the
affordability that's needed. And the Auckland
Unitary Plan is often pointed to and discussed as a prime example,
and has been touted as part of these reforms.
And what the evidence shows is that the rate of increase
between rents and incomes
slowed. It did not reduce. And so
we need to be clear that while liberalization is necessary, it's
not sufficient to really get to a point where
people's incomes are, are rising faster than home prices
and rents, so that true affordability is increasing from,
the, the decades of direction in, i- in
the other direction, or the travel in the other direction.
And inclusionary housing can help do that.
And the thing that's, really great about it is it ensures that we have
balanced communities with a variety of typologies,
tenures, and affordability levels, and so that we don't end up with
segregated communities,
or areas where
as young families move in, kids move away,
parents look to downsize and remain in-- with the same church, the
same neighbors, that there's no supply that fits their needs.
'Cause what we see is typically, you know, three, four, five-plus bedroom homes
going in and very few smaller units.
We also know that the largest housing demand in the future is from one- and
two-person households, and inclusionary can help
to provide that, because the market will always look, to
deliver, where they can maximize profits, and that's not in small
homes and not offering homes that are affordable to just average working
people. And so we see that opportunity.
We have the example of prior legislation, the Affordable Housing and Enabling
Territories Authorities Act, that provided a good framework and
legislation for this, and it does need to be in the
planning framework at the national level, for it to be
effective. That's one of the things that's held back local authorities from
adopting it more broadly, is the lack of clarity around
that. Um, and we think that the planning,
the Planning Act should, you know, look at housing
affordability as a mandatory system outcome,
in that there are various things within the spatial plans and land use
plans that, you know, quantifying those housing needs, setting clear
targets, and then adopting evidence-based i-
interventions. Um, finally
wanted to, to also mention
a, a concern with the current regulatory relief,
provisions, and if, if inclusionary is not explicit, that
it may undermine those in other areas where people would view it as a
change in their ability to utilize their land.
Um, a- and so I think it really needs to come in and, and be explicit to be
able to deliver better outcomes. Uh, one other item
unrelated to inclusionary that we noted, after it
completed the, the submission is in regard to
adaptation in climate change.
And do we just note that the
planning provisions are all focused on future growth and defining those
areas, and we don't see anything abou- about
the known areas, that are subject to climate
change and changes in the environment, and the ability
for local authorities to continue to provide infrastructure.
And so, you know, I think it's one of those things that needs to be a bit
more front of mind in terms of the overall planning,
a- and those spatial plans that are coming forward.
So it's not just about where are we going to grow, but where are the areas that
over the coming decades, because of that great inclusion of a,
a 30-year timeframe, it's important to be looking out that far, but we also need to
understand what may be lost and need to be replaced, through the
planning, system that's put into place.
So thank you.
Thank you. Well, great. Time for a few questions.
I'll go firstly to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, Chair. And thanks, gentlemen, for your submission.
Um, I'd be keen to have a copy of that book, and obv-
so potentially the rest of the committee would too.
Um, we're back in sitting week next week, so even if you could get it through
to us then. Do you have a digital or online version of it as well?
Would be my other question, 'cause-
Y- yes
... if you could send that out, obviously we could get that faster and it'd be
quite efficient. I'd appreciate that.
Yep.
Um, and obviously having-- not having read it, just going off your submission
here, you talk about, affordable housing.
And one of my challenges I've always had 'cause I've, you know, my former role with
council is pushing back on people and saying, "Well, what does affordable housing
mean? How do you define it?"
Mm-hmm.
And I think the most universal, sort of analysis is three
times, you know, median income, and we're sort of sitting between seven and nine
in New Zealand. Um, so perhaps just,
in-- you, you could clarify that in your submission.
And also,
you mentioned typology, which is huge as well.
Uh, obviously the government's made some changes with social housing delivery,
which was going from 12% one- and two-bedroom units to now
lift that up to 50%. Um, so I, I guess if
you've got any views on that. They were absent in your submission, but obviously a
key part of your wider remit.
Yeah.
Uh, I'll cover part one, and Chris, maybe you could do part two.
So yeah, Ryan, absolutely right. We, we in the community
sector, uh-
... define affordability as one third,
in the way that you've described.
And, and typically what we would, what we would do is we'd coalesce the
household and all of the income, the total gross combined household
income. Uh, so that might be three, four income
earners in, in some situations.
Right.
And, and then w- we would, we would say that the housing cost, whether that's a
mortgage or whether that's rent, should be no greater than three times the
total gross combined, household income.
So that's our definition of affordability. Chris, over to you.
Yeah, I'm sorry, I was focusing on the first part of the question.
That's all right.
Thinking I'd answered that. So was-
Oh, look, I'll, just for the purpose of time, I'll, I'll keep moving.
Um, my other... the other thing I was just gonna raise was,
oh, i- inclusionary zoning also runs parallel to value uplift.
Yes.
And we have some other i- legislation which is looking at value uplift as
well, but, n- I appreciate you bringing that into the conversation as
well. Thank you.
Go, Chris.
Yeah. And, and the value uplift is a, is an important one, because when, you
know, government provides infrastructure or even as we saw,
with the Auckland Unitary Plan, you know, average section prices went up
$100,000 for all of those land holders, in
Auckland, according to the research that was done by,
by Auckland Council and others that have looked at that.
So there's clearly, a
f- an economic outcome from governments using its planning
authority. And where that is providing a benefit where a
landowner themselves haven't invested in any improvements, but are
benefiting, from the ability to build more homes on a section
or from increased-
Mm-hmm
... traffic or other things in commercial areas, through
investments in, in like the central rail project
or other, other,
improvements. Retaining a bit of that for public purposes
is an appropriate use through, through value capture mechanisms, which is
analogous to, to some inclusionary housing. Yes.
Thank you.
Okay. Uh, thank you. Uh, Rachel Brooking.
Yeah, thank you. Uh, so you, you referenced Queenstown with the
inclusionary housing, but-
Mm-hmm
... a lot of what, happens in Queenstown is sort of some accidents
of time in terms of some proposed plan changes that they
never happened, but arrangements have been made.
Uh, are you suggesting that something
like the, the, what is it? The HESHA, the housing-
The HEDA, yeah, yeah
... that, that
be put into this legislation? Is that what you'd do?
That's, that's exactly what we're saying, is that there need to be explicit
provisions in the planning bill to enable
this. Uh, as you note, the Queenstown Lakes Program has been
voluntary. Uh, they tried, under the last
district-
Yeah
... plan update to, to make that mandatory.
Um, the environment
or the, the review panel,
saw some merit, but wanted other actions completed first before they would say that
that was necessary. They felt further study was, was completed.
But what we know is that it has been successful, but it,
it hasn't applied everywhere. And with these current
legislative reforms, that ability will disappear.
Yeah. Can you remember, Chris, or tell the committee what, what the
steps were that, stopped the most
recent implementation in Queenstown of a
inclusionary housing zone?
Uh, there was, you know, many
submissions, mainly from, legal firms and
trusts who own property, to be
developed, and they didn't want it applied.
Uh, and so the
committee that reviewed, the environment committee that reviewed it had looked at a
number of other options that were discussed in the paper and, and
wanted council to do further work, say, around targeted
rates, and, and other impacts and
other things that, that may have worked.
Um, so council is, under my understanding, is cur- currently
completing that work. Um, but what we know is that
inclusionary housing and these provisions do work.
They're very targeted in, in how they work, and they result
in, in balanced communities.
Yeah. Just one further supplementary.
Yeah.
We had, on the fast track amendment that was happening at the
end of last year, there was a submission from a
range of different Queenstown players.
Um, and they were saying they had some wording, I don't have it in front of
me, for inclusionary zoning for Queenstown.
It was very Queenstown specific, because the fast track-
Mm-hmm
... has so many Queenstown projects-
Right
... for such a relatively small place.
Um, w- have you looked at that wording, and do you think that wording would, would
work in this legislation?
I, I haven't seen it specifically, but if it was something that was put forward by
the district council, I, I would think we'd be generally supportive because
they have that direct experience of operating a program,
over a long period of time and with a, a large number of
developers. And they've also really embedded that retention
through the local Queenstown Community Housing Trust, to
ensure that those homes are held long-term, and they continue to be able to
offer home ownership outcomes, but through the
retention of the land and the separation of the land from the
improvements. And I... and that's a critical one, so it ensures that
the affordability isn't at move-in but is retained over the long
term, recognizing that, you know, the broader
community is benefiting, uh-
Yes
... from those contributions.
And, for my other committee members, we just had a discussion before
about Waitomo Ca- Caves, which I've not visited.
But the Queenstown Housing Trust, for anybody who hasn't visited them, it's,
it's amazing.
Okay. Thank you. And thank, thank you lot. Thank you.
We've reached our, our fifteen-minute limit, so thank you very much for your
presentation. Very, timely and w- much
appreciated. You do great work. Thank you. Thank, thank you very much, Grant.
Thank you very much. And we'll, we'll see you later. Cheers, eh. Thanks.
Talk to you too. Right. Uh, Hutt City Council should be up
next. Yes, looks like they
are.
Brady, are you hearing us?
Yeah, we got you. Great. Welcome, team.
Um, Grant McKelley, I'm chair of the subcommittee here today.
We have fifteen minutes with you today, and,
we've have your submission. Please feel free to take it as read, but it'd be great
if you highlight a few of your key points and leave time for questions.
Fire away.
Sure. Thank you so much for taking the time and, and acknowledging that, these
extra days were added on at the request of the, select committee to hear from
a few more interest groups. Uh, my name is Councillor Brady Dyer.
I'm a-
Believe me, there were even more than the ones that wanted to be today, so
th-thank you.
Uh, kia ora. My name is Brady Dyer. I'm a city councillor here at Hutt City
Council, and with me I've got Tim Johnson, Johnson, our head of planning, and
Steven Davies, our senior policy planner here at Hutt City Council.
Uh, look, in general we do support, the reform and the intent of it.
Uh, we support regional planning, more efficient, more streamlined.
Uh, and regardless of where the, the conversations that are happening at the moment
around amalgamation go, planning at a regional level simply just makes more
sense. Uh, we support the move to more national direction, but
there are some real risks when this direction can change so quickly, whether that's
a new government or a new priority, and councils and developers are left
scrambling, for the costs. A number of the system goals
inside the act matter, things like climate change, heritage, they
need to be looked at more long term.
Uh, the cert- that certainty is what makes the system work.
Uh, so as I said, we're not opposed to change.
I do wanna make the point that Hutt City Council has always been a, a fairly early
adopter, and in some instances has actually burnt us down the track.
So we were the first council in New Zealand to remove the car parking requirements
when they came out from the government.
We were the first city council in New Zealand to fully implement the medium density
residential standards when they came out.
Um, however, the councils that didn't follow those, follow those law changes, they
were given their own sort of bespoke processes, while councils like ours that
did do the right thing were left holding a much larger cost and a lot longer period
of uncertainty for our, developers and our rate payers.
Uh, so certainty of direction is not just a nice to have, it's essential for it to
work. Uh, so there's a couple of topics from our submission we wanna get into a
little bit more detail for, and then leave heaps of time for questions.
Uh, so the first thing I wanna cover is that the implementation timeline is just
unworkable and that the cost will fall on rate payers and the timeline just simply
can't be met as it currently stands under the proposed
bill. Uh, Hutt City Council has just spent five point three million dollars,
around a hundred and thirty dollars per household, on our own district plan review
that's been constantly paused and stopped and started as new government direction
has been coming out while we've been in the mid- in the middle of that.
Uh, we're, we're finally starting our hearings, in a couple of months' time.
Um, but there's been a lot of uncertainty and that district plan has gone on far
longer than it should have. And that work's still not finished, as I say.
Uh, a lot of that will need to be immediately restarted once this new bill comes
out. Um, but it's the sequencing that makes it worse.
The regional spatial plans must give effect to the national direction
that won't be finalized until after those plans are prepared.
Uh, that's not a system, a planning system, it's just a loop that produces
expensive poor quality outputs. Uh, so good planning should happen in
sequence. Each step needs to be settled, outcomes before moving to the next
step. Um, so that timeline just, it just won't be workable as
proposed. Uh, second point we wanna touch on is the compensation
regime. It's probably one of the most alarming parts for the bill, for a city
council, and needs to be seriously looked at.
Uh, and it introduces a new novel mandatory compensation scheme for the effects of
planning rules on property values.
And look, in principle, Hutt City Council supports the idea that if there's public
benefit from the protection of private property, then the public should
contribute towards that. That's not our concern.
Uh, the concern as drafted is that it's just far too broad.
Uh, take one example, the Environment Court could order compensation for literally
any planning rule that affects property values well beyond the stated
scope of heritage or natural character protection.
Uh, one example is the Regional Council, Greater Wellington Regional Council
submission. They talk about the aquifer, protection rules as just one
example that might need regulatory relief.
And so that exposure just for our council could run into the hundreds of millions
of dollars of unplanned liability.
Enough to affect our credit rating, enough to require tens of thousands of dollars
of, money from rate payers. In an environment of talking about rate
capping and our heavily constrained council finances, this is a really
big, risk. Uh, there's also the perverse outcome
that councils will be paralyzed, will be deferred from taking planning action even
when the very bill requires us to. So you'll be creating a law that
discourages councils from actually implementing it.
Uh, there's also a gap there in the fund, the financial contributions and the
transition that we're worried about.
We already heavily rely on development contributions here in Lower Hutt to fund our
growth, and it seems like there's quite a big gap between development levies coming
in to replace it and development contributions, and that gap just needs to be
addressed. Um, third point is on heritage protection.
Look, we're pretty agnostic around, heritage protection.
Um, we're not taking a position on what should or shouldn't be protected, but if
the government is requiring us to protect something, then the government should be
paying for it. Alongside that, we also think that Heritage New Zealand is probably
better placed to manage heritage protections consistently across city
boundaries. Uh, they can respond faster than waiting for national direction to
change, and then years to trickle down into council's district
plans. Um, final one before we open for questions is,
mana whenua. We, we haven't spoken much about today.
There's a short reference in our, submission.
Uh, but we'd ask the committee to consider and endorse the submissions from our
mana whenua of the te tiriti sections of the bill.Particularly the
submissions from Wellington Tenths Trust, Taranaki Whānui, Te Ātiawa, and
Ngāti Toa Rangatira. Uh, particularly Section 6, 7, and 8 of the
RMA and the lack of adequate replacement protections is a real
risk, and it's one councils like ours we're left trying to manage without the
tools to do it properly.
So look, in summary, Hutt City Council, look, we support the intent of reform, but
the bill as drafted creates real risks for councils like ours, an
unworkable timeline, a compensation regime that could paralyse our decision
making, and a gap in cost recovery that leaves ratepayers holding the bill
for growth. The fixes aren't too complicated in principle.
Sequencing that timeline properly, making government pay for consequences of its
own direction, and close the financial contributions gap before it opens
up. So yeah, happy to open up for questions.
Um, any really naughty questions, I'll send to Tim or Steven.
Great. Thank you very much. Appreciate your, submission.
And we have a question first up from Steve Owen.
Kia ora. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, and thank you all for being here, for your
substantive submission. Um, I've got a couple questions if that's okay.
The first one is about that last comment, or signal last comment you were
making about the treaty provisions.
Um,
from your point of view, does this proposed legislation
read as a backwards step in terms of, the relationship that
you have as a council with mana whenua?
And would it be preferable for all of us, and of
mutual benefit for all of us, that those, existing treaty
provisions are maintained, i.e., that w- that councils are obliged to
uphold the treaty and, and the principles of the Treaty of
Waitangi?
Yeah, I mean, look, put simply, I think we do see it as a, as a backward step with
our relationship with mana whenua partners, and, I think, yeah, we
believe the current, current arrangements w- are, are working well and better than,
than a, a step, a backward step. So the simple answer is yes and
yes.
Okay. Brilliant. And my follow up to that, again Mr Chair, is, um-
Sure. All right
... the, on the regulatory relief, you make a pretty compelling case that if
the government wants, regulatory relief, then they should pay for it,
rather than the council. Um, we had a
submission for Tauranga, Council saying that it was an
intolerable financial burden to place on councils to have to pay regulatory
relief if there is a rates cap as well.
But I wonder if you would, as they are, also prefer that there
was no regulatory relief provision in there.
Would that be a better result?
I'm happy with having no regulatory relief. We already have some relief currently.
Um, heritage protections, for example, we have $100,000, uh-
Right
... fund every year that helps, towards, maintenance, helps towards
rates relief, can help towards resource consents.
Um,
so I don't think going to zero is the right answer.
Like I say, if there's public benefit from the protection of these private
properties, there, there does need to be some element of, of public, paying
for it. Our worry is that where does the line get drawn and how, how
far deep do our pockets need to go to, to, to fund what
could be... Like, take the example of the regional council.
If the aquifer underneath someone's property, deems that
they can't build a 10 story building there, does the council need to fund every
single property on our valley floor, thousands of dollars for lost
development, opportunities?
Like it's, it's just too open-ended at the moment. Um, yeah.
Useful. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Rachel Brooking.
Yes. I just wanted to, focus on financial
contributions and, so the RMA has
both financial contributions and development contributions, and you want
financial contributions to remain at least as an interim measure,
when we're gonna have these new development levies.
W- why?
Yeah. The financial contributions fill a gap that DCs
don't, which is about an unplanned infrastructure, which often we only find
out about with a plan change or a, a specific proposal.
It's not necessarily anticipated by the plan. We haven't budgeted for it.
Um, it's not logged and planned, so it can't be covered by DCs.
Um, financial contributions also, for this council, covers
reserves, which are generally not connected at, at the building stage,
collected at subdivision stage. Um, we've, we've,
contributed to a submission on the development levy scheme, which when that comes
in, I think will solve these issues.
Um, but the, the development levy scheme isn't linked to the planning
bill, and so there's the possibility the planning bill does away with financial
contributions, and then there's a gap in the interim before the development levy
starts. And so
if either of the, you know, parliament can coordinate the two to come together at
the same time, or that financial contributions can be carried over from the
RMA until the, the development levies replace them.
Very good point.
That makes sense. Thank you.
It does make good sense. Thank you.
Look, no further questions? Great.
Well, you've, obviously, you know, done a great job of explaining everything.
Probably by this stage you have heard about five or six days of hearings, so
we, we, we've ... the themes are regular.
And, and thank you very much for what you've, contributed, and thank you for
your submission and, have a great day.
Awesome. Thank you. Thanks so much for your time.
Thank you.
Do we have our next submitter?
Queenstown.
Your part of the world, Rachel.
Beautiful part of the world.
You can't argue with that.
Queenstown Lakes District
Council. Chch-chch-chch.
We're running a bit ahead of schedule now.
Yeah, yeah, they're, they're here.
I've got up-
Oh, I see.
They're just sort of coming up. Yeah.
Ooh.
Just means we'll get a bigger break, Rachel.
Okay. Uh, Queenstown Lakes District
Council.
Good afternoon
G'day. G'day. John, is it?
It is, yeah. You're speaking to Mayor John Glover, who is very dangerously
in a room by himself without any staff at the moment.
Okay. We, we're, we're running a few minutes early.
Are you waiting for your colleagues to arrive?
Well, we can, we can start and yeah, hope-
That'll be great. Yep.
Yeah.
Yeah. I'll, I'll-
Because time, time is everything.
Um-
I'll introduce myself. I'm Grant McKellon, the, chair of the
subcommittee. Um, we've got 15 minutes with you guys today, with you
all, and, we... Please take your submissions as read.
It'd be great if you, make a few comments and then leave time for questions.
We much appreciate it. Thanks.
Perfect.
Go on. Go on.
Yeah. Well, thank you. And, and, just to kick off, say thank you for the
opportunity to speak to our submission.
It's greatly appreciated. Uh, don't envy you and your
colleagues' job, with the thousands of pages that you will have been received
and the probably somewhat repetitious messages that you've received from,
people around the Montreal. But, hopefully I will be joined
by, our general manager of planning and development,
Dave Wallace. Um, so if somebody joins us, that's, that's who that
is. But I, I guess at a high level, you know,
just to speak to, a, a, a couple of themes,
uh... Hello there. There we go. As if by magic.
Look at that. Hey, bingo.
Um, so just, just to speak to a couple of high-level themes.
You know, the first one, you know, as, as I know you all have heard a lot about
already is, is something on the topic of regulatory relief.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, no surprises there. But really, you know, just to
provide a Queenstown Lakes District context.
So ninety-seven percent of our district is outstanding natural
landscape, outstanding natural features.
You know, that's, that's, that's absolutely huge for us.
And, you know, of course, that's, that's really the draw card that brings the vast
majority of our, our visitors into the district.
You know, and that's why twenty percent of all international visitor nights
are, you know, sort of occur in our district, and thirty percent of the
entire tourism workforce is based in our district.
So it's, it's linked inextricably to that landscape.
Um, and of course, in terms of regulatory relief, if we look
at the value of just the privately owned land that has got those
high levels of protection, it's, it's about thirteen billion.
Um, so last time we checked, we didn't have that in the
bank. Um, you know, it equates to about four hundred thousand
per rateable unit. And, you know, you, you'll know where this conversation's going.
We don't have certainty. We don't know what triggers regulatory relief.
You know, what are the definitions around reasonable rights and
use? And, you know, im- importantly, it might be the
decisions about compensation are not made by ourselves, they're made
by an environment court. So from a politician
who's just sitting down for the next ten months to try and develop a long-term
plan, how can we possibly budget against some very, very
significant financial uncertainty, and, and if we're frank,
liabilities that would just, you know, we, we'd close it all and walk away.
So that's, that's, that is a really big issue. That's not underplaying it.
Um, it's, it's probably the, the foremost thing that, that's
in, in, in my mind as to how we possibly, try
and navigate that space. So that liability, the uncertainty, some of the
definitions, the themes that you've heard about from other submissions,
you know, it's, it's, it's covered in ours.
So that would be the, the key first thing that I would,
raise. And then around
that, is it, is it retroactive? You know, we don't have that
certainty. You know, what triggers the, regulatory relief?
Is it just the fact that we've got a lot of this land at the moment?
Has that zoning, therefore we're up for it?
So, and again, that's requested and noted in
our, in our, our submission. Um, the second
thing, I guess, would be affordable housing.
And, you know, we see there's a great opportunity through the planning
bill, to, to, to help us on our
journey. Uh, I think it would be fair to say that within our particular
context, more doesn't equal less.
So we can, we can build house after house.
You know, we enable, you know, thousands of houses to be developed, but we're
not seeing any decrease in price. We're not seeing them becoming any more
affordable. So that, that's, that's a challenge, you know.
So we're meeting the, the government's, directives for housing growth.
We've got enough plan able st- plan enabled land for the next thirty-odd plus
years, but we're not getting cheaper, we're not becoming more affordable.
What does work really well in our district, which some of you and Rachel I know
will be, aware, is that we have a very effective model
of the Queenstown Lakes Community Housing Trust.
Yeah.
And, and that success has basically, with a little bit of
carrot and stick, working with developers where as and when
the value of land increases, where up zoning happens, where things go from
rural, general to, you know, sort of,
residential, then part of that value is captured
and, and invested with the housing trust.
So, so it's a, it's a, you know, zero cost to the
taxpayer. Uh, the developers win, they get up zoning.
Our community wins, they get some, an outcome that is perpetual
affordable housing. And, and, and the model is sort of very well
recognized and, you know, is going from strength to strength.
So
that's been a, you know, developer agreement sort of led
dance. There's a huge opportunity to, to capture
that, to, to lock in some, you know, some links
between value capture for the, the landowner and developers
and, and the community to get that affordable housing.
So, you know, we'd urge you to look at how some of that can
be, incorporated in, into the planning bill.
So that would be the second key theme that I would talk about.
Uh, what I will do, I'm gonna pass over to, Dave Wallace, who's our general
manager of, planning development.
He'll deal with a couple of the more technical side of things, but then we'll throw
it open to questions.
Good afternoon, and, thanks first of all for giving us the opportunity to speak
today. We really appreciate it
Um, look, we deal with the resource management system daily, for a, high
growth council. And,
we deal with it through infrastructure delivery, plan making, community engagement.
And look, the core messages, I suppose, from the technical perspective, from
QLEC is that we, we support reform of the regulatory system.
We understand the difficulties that were created through the RMA.
Um, we are really keen to ensure that national direction is
coherent and that it's internally consistent, and I'll talk about that in just a
moment. Uh, thirdly, we support, coordinated spatial
planning and affordable housing as, Mayor Glover's just talked
about-- talked you through. And, we,
can't support the regulatory framework as it sits right now.
We can go into some detail of that and take some questions if necessary.
And the permittaly-- permitted activity framework also,
appears unworkable in practice from our perspective, so I'll discuss
that. So in terms of, the
support is really because we do agree that the communities need more clarity,
clarity and certainty, and we have an opportunity to,
ensure that happens through RM reform.
Um, in terms of national direction being coherent and aligned,
it's really important that we have clear guidance in how national policy
statements and, national environmental standards interact.
Um,
at the moment, it's un- it's unclear, which,
instruments take precedence, and that's really important for us
to understand to be able to, reduce
litigation, instances within the district.
Um, without that clarity, we really think that decision-making will become slower,
more contested and, and vulnerable to legal challenge, and that
really is the opposite to the intent of the reform from our perspective.
Um, in terms of the coordinated spatial planning and affordable housing, John has
just described the affordable housing conundrum that we're in and the potential
for this being a great opportunity to, assist with affordable
housing in terms of a five percent inclusion, which is outlined within our
submission, of developments of greenfield sites to go
to a, an affordable housing trust that's a non-profit
organization, deliver, perpetual affordable housing in the
district. And, and in terms of coordinated spatial planning to
occur, we won't go into the detail of, fast track, but we
would say that, the fast track, unfortunately, does get in the way of
coordinated spatial planning because we certainly experience within our district
fast-track applications for large housing developments and,
unserviced, unplanned, non-priority areas within a generation one spatial
plan. And that's creating a lot of conflict in terms of how we make decisions about
where we provide infrastructure and how we provide, a
reasonable, CapEx program for our community to pay for through a
spatial planning process that we have.
But that obviously conflicts with the fast-track regime.
Um,
obviously, the outstanding natural landscapes is a massive, aspect that
John talked about. Um,
really for us it's about clarity, of,
the protection of national-- of, of significant natural environments under
the, National Environment Bill.
Uh, the Natural Environment Bill versus the, planning bill, which is
allowing for the use of land, and there's a clear tension between the two.
We're very used to, unfortunately, in the Queenstown Lakes District of litigating
and, and legal challenge, and a lot of the case law around New Zealand
has actually come from this area due to looking at the specifics
of the, old legislation. We're trying our best to ensure that, we
get as much clarity as we possibly can in the new legislation to avoid
those things being tested, when the new legislation comes in
place. Um, regulatory relief, of course, is
one of the key concerns,
over and above what John has explained there.
I think that there's a, a significant incentive for litigation in this district.
There's five thousand land parcels and private ownership within areas of
outstanding natural landscape. Um, the land values in the
areas of those locations within the Queenstown Lakes District means that,
means that they're very high-value propositions for people who want to,
litigate against QLEC for undertaking development in those areas.
And we know that, from international research, a landscape is a draw
card with regard to people coming into the, country and from around the
country into the district. So it's really to try and understand how we
manage to protect that draw card, the, the massive impact it has on, New
Zealand overall in terms of tourism in our district and our community, and how we
ensure that, those areas are, appropriately
protected. And it's very clear in relation to what relief
might, what, what might make up regulatory relief in
a, in a system that would actually make, or would be more
clear at this point in time. So the, the terms of reasonable use,
significant impact, we have advised that they, they're going
to be, open to legal challenge, and that's something we're trying to
protect against. Um, in terms of permitted activity rules
in Section thirty-A, this is a system that
appears to be drawn up for people to provide information to councils if they
undertake a, activities that are permitted.
And then council needs to monitor those activities, check whether they meet plans
within a ten-day period, and do that throughout the district.
We do think that that can, lead to significant
aggravation and wastage in the district, for council having
to look at permitted activities and go onto people's properties
to, ask them to pay for us to ensure that what they have actually
completed is, a permitted activity rather than a regime
that would perhaps, only have council do that if it
was voluntarily put forward by applicants who may want to sell their land and, and
regularize everything on the site, or if there's complaints relating to a site.
So we think that potential aspect will add a lot of complexity, will
add cost because council will have to develop a team to undertake this task on
a regular basis. Uh, we'll have to create systems, and
we don't think that's really in, the f- the flavor of
what this reform is actually being tasked to
do.Um,
in terms of timing of regional plans and spat- regional
spatial plans, and sub-regional plans, we do
support spatial planning in the district.
We have generation one, and looking forward to working through generation
two. What we would ask for, and this in the context of, the regional
deal for Matthew Otago C- Central Lakes Region, is for there to
be a possibility for a ministerial exemption for,
to, to be able to create sub-regional plans that can,
quickly and tangibly,
deliver results that government are looking for within, the discrete areas of
locational context of, QLD,
QLDC, Otago Re- Regional Council, and CLDC in
Central Otago District Council.
Um, in closing, we, as I said, we support regular,
uh... We, we support,
the RM reform, but at this point in time as our submission
outlines, there's a lot of questions and, clarity sought
for how different things are gonna work and how pro- things are gonna be
prioritized over others within the framework.
So that's really just a very quick run through of what our submission is talking
about, and, open to answer any questions you might have.
Great. Thank you very much. And we have a question from Steve
Abel.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for your excellent submission.
I appreciate your forthright comments on the regulatory relief
at 11.3, that you consider the level of fiscal exposure to be
unacceptable, unmanageable, and inconsistent with sound public finance
principles. I wonder if that 13 billion figure that you've
evaluated, is that including... That's presumably if
we take into account retrospective application of the regulatory
relief concept. Even if there was prospective application of
it, it strikes me that it would be
unworkable. And can you reflect in that
context on the fairness, of, you have some very
wealthy landowners and characters in your neck of the woods, of
them being able to extract money from the public coffers that have
been paid for by the least wealthy, Queenstown
residents and ratepayers, and how
that feels in terms of the fairness of representation of your people
where, the poorest might be paying the wealthiest, just
to retain the basic values, of that
region.
Yes, absolutely. And, it's interesting, we've already received letters
from, landowners in these areas who've had decisions, that
didn't go their way, previous planning decisions that are, now
feed into the operative district plan who have already identified for us that
they're going to be applying for regulatory relief for those past decisions.
And that's one of the key issues that we had.
Not only will we be in a position where if regulatory relief was put
forward, as you said, our community would have to pay for,
the protection of natural environments that's, that's provided for under the
Natural Environment Act. Um,
but
the, the f- the litigation risk is probably one of
the key, fears that we have when we have so many private owners of this
land, and a massive incentive for people to undertake quite
straightforward opening litigation to a regulatory relief
framework.
Mm.
Um, we consider that we'd have to sink a, an awful lot of capital, as well as the
regulatory relief outcome, into a process of going through the courts
with thousands of applications. Um, obviously, through regulatory relief we'd
have to create justification reports, a relief framework.
None of that is being funded centrally, so that's additional costs as well to a
ratepayer. And again, I think that's, not the intent of the reform, so
I'm, I'm not sure how that would work.
Well, can, can I just ask a sup on that?
Can, can you elaborate, without giving names and so forth, I'm interested in
an example, 'cause you said you've already had people communicate.
Yes.
Can you just give us an, a actual example of that?
'Cause that can be quite illustrative.
Um, I, I, I can certainly provide it.
Uh, in terms of the names of the person, I can't provide them right now, but this
is-
Oh, well, I'm not ask-
Yeah
... I'm not asking the names of the people.
I'm just, the, the, the concept of the example, how they felt that they're gonna
qualify.
Yeah. So we went through a process of a plan change for,
outstanding natural landscapes and, rural landscape character, and one
of those decisions for a landowner put their,
the, absorption capacity for the land for development as
minimal. And they've now come back and said, "Well, you have actually stopped
me being able to produce, to use my land in a
reasonable way, so we're going to come for regulatory relief, because you've
undertaken..." 'Cause that decision was made, and that was through the Environment
Court as well.
And, and that, that actually speaks to another example.
You know, we have in our district areas that are classified as highly productive
soils. You know, and, and, and, you know, because the sector, the
agricultural sector, has put pressure on us to protect them, so we,
we've imposed those protections.
But we might get some landowners say, "Well, that's stopping us from
building housing," so, because it's, you know, a restriction on use.
So it's a little bit caught in, in the middle.
I think if this was a discussion about
regulatory relief at a point of when new restrictions are
imposed-
Mm
... you know, as, as councilors, and governors, and the community, we, we would
have that, what's the decision, what's the consequences?
We could see that.
Yeah.
And I think that would be something that we have to, what value do we put on some
of this? You know, nationally, that's a different discussion.
But I think it's that uncertainty that it just opens the floodgates.
The only people that win here will be the lawyers.
You know, I think I might need to change job, because, you know, we've,
we've been litigating our last 10-year plan, you know, so
10 years ago, and we've still have got appeals in the court from 10 years ago on
our district plan. And, you know, that is the, is the value proposition for the
lawyers, the value of our land, and, and they will just be at the door here
again.
Well, thank you. Look, we've, we've had our time, and thank you very much you
guys. Really, it's been really good, 'cause you've highlighted a particular, couple
of particular issues for your area, thank you, which is much appreciated.
So thanks very much and, enjoy the beautiful landscapes down there,
huh?
Yes. Again, I appreciate-
While you still can
... wh- wh- whilst we can.
See you later, eh?
Thank you, everybody. Take care.
Okay. Okay, team, well, we've now got a break from
afternoon tea, so I will see you back at
2:30. Okay? Cheers.
Right,
team. There must be some people floating
around. Let's get ready to start. Have
we got... Yeah,
Duncan. Have we
got,
is Nick Simmons
online?
The Waikato Farmers group?
Ah, Graham. Yep, I see him
there.
Righto, you wanna bring them through, please.
Whoever our clerk is at the moment.
Graham, you can take your mute off, mate, and whip your video on, that'd be great.
Is my video on?
Yeah, no. No, I haven't got your video yet, mate.
Just-
Oh, God. Um-
Don't ask me to help you. We're never clean.
Uh, look, there may be a problem with this end on
that, I'm sorry. Um, oh, here we
go. Here we go.
See, Manan. How,
are we o- okay now?
No, I j- no, no. If you can't get it, it's not the end of the world, mate.
We can
crank on.
Um-
It's a shame.
Just-
Will I start, Graham?
Yeah, away you go. Yeah, it was just, uh... No worries, Graham.
Anyway, welcome to the, Environment s-
Select committee, the subcommittee.
Uh, Graham, we've got, 15 minutes with you, and we have your
submission. Feel free to take it as read, but be great maybe highlight one or two
of your key points and leave time for a few questions. It'd be fantastic.
Fire away. Thank you.
Okay, thanks. Sorry a- about the,
video. Um, look, thanks very much for the
opportunity. Much appreciated. Um, by way of
background, I think we should explain our group a bit.
Uh, we gave evidence, for the Environment Court
appeal on Waikato's, plan change one,
and through these, submissions, as well
as a section 274 party,
without representation. Um, of
relevance to this hearing, the court welcomed farm input to
test the prac- practicability, affordability, and workability of
the provisions. As a result, many of, of the objectives
and policies had to be tweaked to align with real-world
constraints. I think that's important, uh-
Yeah
... going forward. For me, I was a natural resource
engineer before a farmer. I was heavily involved in representing
farmers during the development of the first generation of
RMA plans. I've served on two,
RMA ministerial advisory committees and four
Crown regulatory boards, including the EPA and Electricity
Commission. Now, moving to our submissions,
we, support the intent of the legislation,
but have several concerns. Uh, we filed a
supplementary submission last week.
I trust you have received it. If you haven't-
Yeah
... it's somewhere in your system.
Um, and, um-
Yep. No, we got it. We got it.
Yep, thank you. And that, will be what
I'm talking to you people, this afternoon
about. Our written submissions cover a large number of
clauses, including identifying issues not covered by
the peak farming organizations.
Today, I will focus on the key instruments and whether
NEB will solve some of the problems inherent in developing
plans under the RMA.
So I'd like to touch on four issues.
Firstly, ministerial decision-making.
While we support the whānau approach, the process,
particularly at ministerial level, needs to be
robust to ensure the whānau is pointed in an
appropriate direction. The national policy direction
should be embedded in the primary legislation to support
stable policy and investment certainty,
something we haven't had for the last decade or so with fresh
water regulations. Um, I realize,
your time ti- timeframe, so I
suggest, that be seen, as a possibility
to be incorporated later as an amendment.
Um, m- the ministerial technical advisory
group option, we support, and
we feel it should be made mandatory,
so that, there's a independent source
of expertise, covering a
diverse, a diversity of expertise that's,
not otherwise available. Uh, particularly
important given, the, this whānau
approach. Um, Clause 70 only requires a
summary of reasons, for proposed national
instruments. There seems no good reason for not requiring
the same assessments as for natural environment plans.
Second point, issue, the sequential
process of Clause 9 requires,
developing, cascading
from goals through national instruments to rules and
NEP's. This is very similar to the RMA
cascading from the purpose through objectives and
policies to rules. Uh, this seq-
sequential process tends to foreclose on
the iteration that, was key in
resolving PC1 appeals.
Um, objectives and
policies, need to be adequately
tested for feasibility, cost-effectiveness, and
affordability. Um, if not, r- they result
in aspirational targets that cannot be implemented.
They therefore create false public expectations and
set up resource users to fail.
Uh, thirdly, planners should not be expected to be
experts in resource use. Uh,
pre-notification, this is something, that
is, often used, in other regulatory
environments, but unfamiliar in RMA.Uh, but
very important. Pre-notification involvement of
affected resource users should be mandatory,
but confined to matters of practic-
practicability, cost-effectiveness, and workability.
Any fear of regulatory capture by, requiring
such, can be avoi- avoided if involvement
is constrained to, those matters.
By involvement, I mean negotiation, because
that's essentially the process, which is
more than consultation, but less than
co-design. Without early and genuine
involvement, adversarial rather than more cooperative
relationships can develop between councils and
resource users. This constrains the disco-
discovery of least cost solutions, which in turn
delays environmental enhancement.
Furthermore, the imple- im- implementation of regulation is
facilitated when resource users feel invested
in the regulations.
Lastly, regulation is only justifiable when it is
judged to be overall beneficial to society and the,
the environment, and is capable of being
implemented. It is of concern to us that the
Clause 56 requirements are less onerous than the
RMA Section 2 assessment of options,
practicability, efficiency, and effectiveness.
However, the RMA is deficient in our view in only
requiring the identification of the most appropriate
objectives without, further
assessment. This has often resulted in aspirational
objectives that are not capable of being implemented, such as in
PC1, where many long-term water quality targets
were more onerous than assisting in natural state
sub-catchments. They were also overall
detrimental, as urban and rural use would have had to be
largely disappear to allow the catchment to revert to
something approximating the natural state.
In other words, all provisions, including national policy
statement, direction, need to be assessed for the
above-mentioned Section 32 matters, and all
provisions should be in- individually addressed in the
evaluation reports, contrary to Clause
106. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Open for
questions.
Right. Right.
Okay. Well, yeah, well, Steve's got a question.
Steve Abel, fire away, and then I've got one after
you.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Graham.
I, I'm wanting to
drill into the problem of measuring diffuse pollution.
Yeah.
And
if we only try and solve that problem through
farm plans,
the risk is we miss the catchment scale
nature of that problem, where you may find
that one farm in a catchment is overwhelmingly
contributing to that diffuse pollution that's
impacting, the quality of the water in that, in the
downstream.
And
yet that farm plan might only provide
for,
incremental
improvements that are insufficient to meeting the challenge.
So would you agree that we need
catchment scale approach
to dealing with water pollution, for example, improving water
quality?
Uh, well, certainly, there would be,
some situations where that's, required.
Um, it wouldn't, displace,
the use of farm environment plans.
Um, I think, the challenge in doing
catchment-wide projects is how they're
funded. Um, and, I think,
you are then getting into more than regulatory
tools at that point. Uh, certainly the
RMA, was, the, there
would have been facility there to,
take other, measures other than regulatory measures.
I think the NEB, would allow
that. Um, but I'm sorry I haven't,
trawled through the clauses with that
question in mind.
No, that's fine. No, I just wanted to hear your reflections on it.
Thank you.
Now you, where did I, I spot this. We,
yeah, Graham, you, you talk about need,
wanting more certainty. Where would I see this?
And you wanted the, um... Where is it?
You wanted the, some of the national direction stuff embedded so we
don't get the flip-flopping. Um, the question I would have to
that is, what happens if over time things
change?
Um-
Yeah, finish, yeah, go. In terms of, in terms of the science
changes and that sort of stuff.
Uh, well, I've, well, the, the
only aspect of national direction I'm asking f-
for that to be embedded is at policy level, not
national, standard
level.
Okay. Gotcha. Yes.
Um, so policy level, I see,
the need for stability over time and, for
investment purposes and to-
Yeah
... avoid, lots of council
reworking, as we've had,
um... Yeah, so, of course,
legislation can be amended, but, less
easily. It's finding a balance, I
thinkThe balance that sits by saying,
"Yes, at policy, national policy level that should
be embedded, but at national standard level it should not
be."
Okay. Thank you. Thank, thank you for clarifying that. That's very helpful.
Um, now, just the other thing you mentioned here was the ministerial decision
making,
and that you're quite right to probably highlight that, it's one that's come up
before now. And so your suggestion is that there be a, a tech
advisory group work with the minister effectively that to
advise strongly so that you get scientific outcomes as opposed to as
such political ones. Is that what you're trying to say here?
Um, w- I think the key thing I'm looking for
there is diversity of expertise.
Okay.
Uh, so, rather than,
being left to whatever is served up,
in the Wellington process-
Yep
... this makes it quite clear that, these,
f- national instruments should be developed with the benefit
of a diversity of e-expertise. So I'm talking
about, environmentalists, iwi,
resource users, science,
yeah, the full breadth.
Just I suppose that's so you... they actually what they, what comes out, for
example, which you highlighted through your, your advocacy work you've done
previously, is that, that it's then workable effectively and
achievable, which you highlighted as, which is quite right.
If it's unachievable, people's gonna try.
Yeah. Well, simply is impossible, if
those who are, expected to pay cannot
afford. Um-
Yeah
... so, I'm afraid,
RMA has been too much embedded
in as-aspiration and not enough in
reality and, uh-
Mm-hmm
... I guess I'm very keen to, address that,
aspect.
Okay. Aspiration. Okay. Okay. Look, that, look,
that very, very helpful. Thanks.
Very constructive comment, feedback here.
Thanks very much, Graeme. Um, take it on board and we'll feed that into the
process. You've... Certainly good to see you've come up with some solutions,
which is always helpful. Yeah. So, look, thank you for your
contribution. Uh, really appreciate it.
And I s- and I recognize a few of the names on the document.
Um, is that Kim Robinson from up my way?
Same Kim Robinson?
No, no. North Waikato Kim Robinson.
Okay. Different Kim.
Lock, Lockyer Farms. Farmer.
Okay. Ah, yes, I do know her. No, cool. Righto. Look, good.
All the best today. Thanks very much for your contribution. Cheers, Graeme.
Thank you very much.
Cheers. Bye.
Right. Next up we have Bathurst Resources,
I believe.
Or,
hmm.
Can you come-
Bathurst Resources, are we here? Ah, here we go.
Yep.
G'day. Hello. Um-
Hi
... welcome to the Environment Select Committee, Subcommittee of the
Environment Select Committee here today. We have 15 minutes with you.
Thank you very much for your, submission, which we have here in front
of us. Please take it as read, but feel free to highlight a few points and then
we can open... and then we'll have good to have some time for questions. Fire away.
Thank you.
Can I just check that you can hear me?
Absolutely.
Great. Thank you. Um, I'm Fiona Bartyer.
I'm the General Manager for Health, Safety, Environment and Community for
Bathurst Resources. Um, with me today I've got Gerard. Go ahead.
Hi. Gerard Carr, General Counsel.
Um, so Bathurst is New Zealand's leading coal mining company.
Uh, Bathurst owns and operates, coal mines on the West Coast, Southland, and
in the Waikato, and employs approximately 700 people,
and contributed $350 million annually to New Zealand's GDP in FY
'25.
Our submission highlights a number of aspects from the new bills that we broadly
support. Uh, we just wanna focus on five key matters today.
Yep.
Um, we, in regards to the planning bill, we broadly support the goal set
out in Clause 11 of the planning bill.
Particularly we support Clause 11 (1) which seeks to support and
enable economic growth and change by
enabling the use of, and development of
land. We're concerned, however, that the explanatory note in the planning
bill is not currently reflected in the goals set out in Clause 11
of the planning bill. The explanatory note specifically
identifies the need to enable primary sector activities,
including mining. Um, primary sector activities make
a major contribution to New Zealand's economy.
Um, Bathurst seeks an addition of a new goal in Clause 11 in the planning
bill that expressively enables primary sector growth and
development, which includes aquaculture, forestry, pastoral
farming, horticulture and mines and
quarries. In regards to the Natural
Environment Bill, we've also got concerns with the
goals that it sets out in this bill.
Clause 11, requires the achievement of no net loss of
indigenous biodiversity. Clause 11 does not
specify the scale at which that outcome is to be
achieved. For example, is it at a site level, an
ecological district level, a regional level, or
nationally? Which creates uncertainty into how the
requirement to achieve no net loss will be applied in
practice. Bathurst notes that the national policy statement for
indigenous biodiversity requires no net loss
overall-The NPSIB also recognizes the need to
provide for the social, economic, and cultural wellbeing of people and
communities now and into the future.
The unqualified reference, no net loss, is ambiguous and
is likely to lead to debate over what is
intended. Large projects typically rely on the
integrated package of measures to avoid, remedy, mitigate, and
where appropriate, offset and compensate residual ecological
effects. If no net loss is applied rigidly, particularly at
a local or a site scale, it will be difficult to demonstrate compliance
even where a project delivers improved outcomes overall through
offsetting or compensation measures.
Uh, we raised that clause 11d could operate as an unintended bottom
line, constraining decision-makers in circumstances where broader overall
assessment
would support the activity subject to appropriate safeguards and
offsetting or compensation measures.
I request that this goal is reframed to focus on protecting significant
indigenous vegetation and significant habitats of indigenous
fauna rather than requiring a vague and universally applied
no net loss outcome.
Uh, there's some conflict between the two bills, and we consider that at least some
guidance should be provided in the bills as to how conflicts
between the two different goal sets are to be
reconciled. This job is left to the national
direction. The processes for preparing national direction
provide limited opportunity for public input.
A significant amount of detail will be contained in the national
direction. The bills currently only provide the opportunity to make
submissions on the draft direction.
So we submit that the bill should be amended to provide additional opportunities
for public input, including a mandatory hearing
process. For regional spatial
plans, the mandatory requirements in the regional spatial
plans in Schedule 2 are framed with a
strong urban focus, primary emphasis on urban
development and associated activities.
We request that these mandatory requirements are expanded to
require regional spatial plans to identify current minerals
extraction activities, known but undeveloped mineral
deposits, and areas for further exploration.
An integrated approach to land use planning should include primary production
land, not just urban areas. Mining is
extremely locationally constrained, and it must occur where the mineral
deposits occur. Identifying minerals deposits
within regional spatial plans will enable a much more efficient approach to
integrating infrastructure, industrial and primary
properties in the rural sector
or the rural environment.
Uh, in terms of our, Bathurst operability, we rely on
existing coal mining licenses and ancillary coal mining
licenses. Uh, this is quite bespoke to,
a number of companies within New Zealand.
Um, those licenses confer a bundle of statutory rights that allow
Bathurst as a license holder to undertake certain land use
activities without the need for land use, for
land use resource consents. Coal mining
licenses and ancillary coal mining licenses that Bathurst holds are due to
expire in mid twenty twenty,
seven. On expiry, new permits will be required
under the Crown Minerals Act, and consents will be required for land use
activities. Bathurst requests that under the transitional provisions of
the planning bill, existing coal mining licenses and ancillary
licenses are preserved as land use consents until
new land use plans are operative or at a minimum until
December 2027, and this approach would be
consistent with the approach taken in the Resource Management Duration of Consents
Amendment Act 2025.
We suggest that this outcome could be achieved by including coal mining licenses
and ancillary licenses within Clause 17 of Schedule 1 of the planning
bill, which addresses the duration of certain existing resource
consents
so that the extended duration provisions apply to those
licenses.
So thank you very much for your time. They're our five key points.
Um, thanks for listening and to consider our submission, and we'll welcome any
questions.
Great. Thank you. We have a question from Steve
O.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for your submission.
I'm wondering in terms of the no net loss, your concerns there,
and further your concerns in terms of addressing adverse effects,
you point out that there are circumstances where offsetting or compensation will
simply not be possible. Would an example of
that be your desire to mine the Denniston Plateau, which
is a forty-million-year-old sandstone bonsai
ecosystem, rich in endemic species, and,
your current proposal would have catastrophic,
irreversible, effects on that ecosystem
that are beyond anyone's ability to compensate for.
It will be destroyed and gone. Is that the sort of thing you're talking
about?
Uh, in regards-- I guess in regards to large projects, I didn't say
that they-- it was where appropriate, where offset and
compensation, of residual ecological effects would be applied, not
that they couldn't be applied.
It's also about do they apply on a regional basis, a national
basis? Um, it's being clear about the test.
Yeah, but is this an example of that?
I mean, presumably, no net loss would be impossible on Denniston
because you have, you know, irreplaceable,
endemic species that live only there.
And once you've mined it, they'll be extinct.
So
that's a-
Um, I think the company-
-catastrophic loss
... I think the company's pretty confident that we can achieve good environmental
outcomes up there should we mine there
Well, at least somebody, that's one person who's confident and the rest of us
aren't. Um, can I ask a follow-up question that's on a different subject, Mr.
Chair?
Yeah, sure. Fire away.
Um, you've made it pretty clear that you think
the splitting of the bill into a planning bill and a natural resources
bill, is not that workable, and it would be
preferable, to have them combined.
Um, the, the, the cross-referencing and integration issues
could readily be resolved by incorporating all the provisions into a single piece
of legislation. Um, would that be similar to what
we had with the Natural and Built Environment Act?
Um, it could be similar. Um, I don't think that's
necessarily the way we would suggest it goes.
Um, I could see multiple ways you could s- resolve that.
I, look, frankly, you could keep the bills separate if that was the committee's
desire. I just think there needs to be more work done on that integration aspect of
the bills.
Yeah, 'cause there's lots of overlap. That's your point.
You've, you've got multiple options before you to solve the problem there.
I just think that's one area that we'd ask the select committee to pay particular
attention to.
Thank you.
Go, Ryan Hamilton.
Oh, thanks, Chair. Uh, thanks for your submission.
Obviously s- Steve Abel doesn't speak for all of us, even though he assumed he
did. Um, but there is a, there is a question in there
just regarding your,
existing consents on coal mining, CMLs and
ACMLs. Uh, they expire December
2027. Is that just for you? Was that the industry?
Obviously, you'd want some
certainty or con- continuity with the transitional
period.
Can I take that?
Oh, do you want me to?
Yeah, you can.
Yeah. Um, so, different licenses, for gold and coal,
will have different, periods of expiry.
Um, they, it really depends on when they were granted.
The problem we've got is these were all granted under legislation that has since
long expired. This is, you know, from the
1950s from mem- memory.
Right.
And it was replaced by the Crown Minerals Act in, in the '90s.
Um, the, the problem really from the perspective of the environment
is that these things have continued on.
Um, now, if we'd put that into sort of resource management more, we'd get land use
consent, right? And, you know, land use consents don't really have an expiry date.
You just use them, as long as you're doing your thing, and you're doing it within
the bounds of the, consent, you're entitled to keep doing it.
Um, that's the problem here. We don't have that with these mining
licenses.
Um, like everyone else gets their land use consents effectively for as long as they
need them.
Right. Okay, so that, you're seeking some, I guess,
identification or, certainty in this transitional
period, obviously-
Yeah
... to hire us.
And you could, I mean, as a minimum, we think transit, the transition period that
everyone else has got with their land use consents under the act
that Parliament's f- fit to pass in '25 would be a good starting
point.
And what, what are the potential ramifications if you don't get that certainty-
Mm
... for you or the industry?
Uh, well, there's jobs and economic risk associated with
continued operations for some very large corporates in New Zealand.
Right. Okay, thank you. And remind me, what was your contribution to GDP in New
Zealand last year?
Um, in FY25, it was 350 million. Uh, the previous
year, 388.
Cool. Thank you. Thanks for your time.
Can I make a minor point of order, Mr. Chair?
Yeah, sure.
Just to clarify, I wasn't presuming to speak for the committee,
Mr. Hamilton. I was just reflecting on the comments, of the
submitter that, they believe they can mitigate the environmental
consequences of mining denistone, and I believe they're one of the few
institutions who think that.
That's okay. Point taken, Steve. Fair enough. Thank you.
Um, I just wanna go back, I just... well, I, I wasn't quite picked it up,
but, I, with, with respect to those e- expiring of the
licenses, is that across the sector, a, a whole bunch of
them coming up, all at the same time, or just,
or is that just for you
guys?
No, it's a sector issue.
S- so the whole sector's lined up on those dates pretty much?
Uh, no, they'll be at various different dates, but there, there is a b- there is a
lot of the, those dates fall due over the next five to 10 years.
There are some that push out, up, up into the, we think,
2050s for the latest.
Yeah, 20... I think the latest one is 2062.
Oh, wow.
Okay.
Um, but there are quite a few that are coming off in 2028,
2027, 2028.
Are they like 35-year consents issued in the '90s or something of that nature?
Yeah, 40 years, at the time.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah, thank, thank you. That's a good, good point for us to take note of.
Thank you very much. Hey, look, don't appear to be any other questions.
Thank you. A very fulsome submission. Really appreciate it.
Um, thank you very much and, yeah, have a great day.
Cheers.
Thank you.
Bye.
Right.
Next up we have McGinness
Institute, according to my list. Is that right? Yeah.
Do we, yes, we have them
there.
How's everybody?
Great. Great. Uh, welcome, welcome to the, Environment
Select Committee, subcommittee. Grant McCallum, I'm chairing it.
Um, please feel free, we've got 15 minutes of your time.
Uh, please take your submission as read, but you're welcome to highlight a few
points.
Mm-hmm.
And, and then we'll leave time for questions. It'll be much appreciated.
Thank you. Um, Grant, my family are sheep and cattle
farmers, so I have a relationship with you.
Oh, very good. Whereabouts, whereabouts, whereabouts?
Um, King Country.
Oh, yes, yes.
Yeah.
We're, my mum's from King Country, so.
Oh. Oh.
Out near Okura, Ohura.
Oh.
Yeah.
No, I'm Matua Tangowah.That's where our initial farm was.
Oh, very good. Anyway, enough of the farming talk.
Okay. No, no, no. It's d- But it's quite good for talking.
And, hello, Steve. We've met, a long time ago.
Cole.
Right.
Thank you, Ryan. I haven't had the pleasure, nor with Helen.
So, hey look, basically I've got a little PowerPoint.
I've sort of tried to work out what I would focus on,
and, and kind of share, I think, hopefully quite,
hopefully high level.
Yeah.
And then I'll tunnel you right down into aquaculture, the joys.
Um-
Great
... so
I'm just gonna share a screen. Oh, sorry. It's...
Thought it was on, but
Cole. Okay. And
where's
share? So hopefully... Right.
There we go.
Yeah, fantastic.
Wow.
So, um-
Mm-hmm
... the, I, I think it's really important to ask this question around, what's
catching people off guard at the moment.
And so we do foresight, and that's our sort of, specialty, I
suppose. Um, and basically things are moving at pace.
Um, nothing new, I'm sure, to most of you.
Um, but I think it's really important to keep, and, you know,
in view of what this legislation is going to have to deal with.
Um, and I've just kind of got a little list there, but basically the
warming waters of the a- and the aquaculture industry are,
obviously really prevalent. But there's also obviously the
geopolitical, the fuel shortages, you know, the
demand for minerals, the AI. Everything is just turning into a
big storm. Um, so what that means for...
Oh, sorry, you can't see that. So there's a list there of
those. Um,
there won't be anything new to you probably, but it's actually
understanding about, it's almost the scale and complexity that
is coming, hitting us, and can the legislation...
So I've put this forward as almost like to test what can the
legislation deal with this integration of so many different
things. Um, I can come back to those if you
want, but I want to go straight into the legislation.
Um, so basically one of the things I always look for is the purpose.
Now, obviously the previous reforms sort of threw everything
into one piece of law. This has created two different pieces of
law, and then co- created instruments that try and
tangle those purposes. So therefore the goals and
purposes are really important. Um, and I wanted to
just highlight. So the way I'm gonna do it, colored I'm afraid,
green is things I just wanna highlight 'cause I know I'm coming back to, and
the yellow is the things that I think that need to be done or added or
considered. Um, the first of these, I think h- having use
in both, terms, purposes are not needed and,
show a lack of clarity. Um, and the
yellow is the bit that I just don't think you can call coastal marine area
land. I just think you're, you're, you're playing.
I mean, it's just too hard. Um, that's the definition that's
currently in the legislation, and I think that that does not
cover the coastal marine area. So there is a, a
mismatch from my understanding of the legislation.
Um, and that's relevant for what's coming up.
Um, the second bit is around the Natural, Environment
Bill, where we've got the word use in again, and I
think once again it's not needed and it creates confusion.
Arguably it sort of creates this weird bridge between the two pieces of
legislation, and I think that is problematic
given the, the sort of simplistic structure that
you're trying to put in place by having the purpose and the goals
here, and then having these instruments.
So I think you're creating a rod for our own back, which
I don't think is in anyone's interests.
Um, the bit that I... Then I'm going to go into
aquaculture mentions, keeping in mind these two dis-
distinct purposes that I've highlighted in the green.
The planning bill, which is planning and regulation, development and
enjoyment, and the natural environment bill being protection and
enhancement. So then you throw aquaculture
into, these two pieces of legislation, and you suddenly
find the planning bill has five mentions and the natural
environment bill has 238 mentions.
Now,
that is not what I would call
structuring... Uh, think of it as sheep.
I told you I'd use my sheep analogies.
You wanna separate your different types of sheep, you wanna do that with a
purpose, and what's, what's the aquaculture is, is actually
creating a mixed bag. And that's seen, I think, even
in, the reporting of the submission of King Salmon where they're wanting
targeted goals. Well, where are they wanting the targeted
goals? Not sure, because we can't see the written submission, but
it implies that they want it in the planning bill.
So it's, m- so one of our arguments is that obviously, you know, this
bit about land and coastal marine area needs to happen, and I
don't think anyone would disagree with that, all sides of the
fence. I think the, aquaculture regulation is
sitting definitely in the wrong place, and it should be in the planning
bill. And the planning bill needs to deal with development and
enjoyment, while the, the natural environment bill needs to
deal with protection enhancement.
So those are those high level purposes.
So I suggest you remove the term use, from
the purpose of both bills, and you use the word
development where you've used use in the interpretation of
the planning bill. I think you can get away with that, and I can talk you
through how I would do that. I think it's terribly important.
King Salmon, in the press have said that they want targeted goals for the
industry to sit, within these bills.
I'm not quite sure, I'm assuming it's the planning bill, as I said, but
it's just t-Terribly important that we don't get
legislation turning into specific targeted goals for
industry. Um, that is what strategy documents are
for. Um, and that's what the budgets for, but that is not what
legislation should be used for. So, for me it's, it's, you know,
pushing, the boundaries unnecessarily.
I did this little AI thing. I thought it would be really helpful to say,
okay, New Zealand Planning Institute, just because they are sort
of looking at it from an operational perspective.
So, this is a little AI, WIDAS, McGinnis, NPI and NCS,
where do we align and where we diverge.
So, NZPI or NZ King Salmon might not agree with this,
but this is what the AI says which, you know, you can...
I'm just putting it in that predicament.
Just because I think it's really important to look at what...
where the commonalities are. Um, and we know that
these tensions are always going to exist, hence why these
instruments have been created. So, yes, we
have, you know, we're very environment first, we're long term,
so forth. Uh, P- NZPI is, you know,
practical implementation. They're trying to look at it from an operational aspect
and I really rate that. Um, I think that's terribly important.
And then you've got King Salmon who are, you know, development,
industry focused, and there's a place for that.
So I'm not saying that these are wrong.
What we've gotta do is create a really good structure and framework that
enables all the parties to have that kind of
discussion. Um,
I'm just gonna quickly go, through some quite
specific bits. Um, this is an example that really actually
indicated to me that there was a problem.
This is in the planning bill, and it's talking about the proposed natural
environment plan, and then suddenly it's got this like, I
think they were trying to find out where to put the piece of the jigsaw puzzle,
and they put in C4 provides for, or
relates to aquaculture activities.
Now this is sitting in the natural environment plan,
so it's kind of like everything else is protects or
relates to. So it was kind of a red flag for me.
Um,
the second bit I just wanted to refer you to is this is the
interpretation use of the definition of use.
Um, and this is y- so planning bill
interpretation definition of what use means.
And you can see that really alter, demolish, drill,
dem- deposit. Th- th- they're all about
development. So you could actually get rid of use and put
that development term there, which would
nicely align back to the purpose of the act.
Um, the second thing I wanted to relate to that is I'm not
quite sure where damage, destroy or disturb the habitats of plants or animals
or, or... I don't understand why that's there.
Um, it seems
weird. But anyway, there might be a really good legal reason.
But I think, you know, it's im- it is important to define what
development is, and I don't think use, their
definition, works. And we've got, about three more
slides. This is just, I wanted to illustrate to
you, the... Sorry, I'm just going back into the
goals. Sorry, your ph- photos are over my notes.
Um, the, um... So
I talked about the importance of moving all the planning and regulation into the
planning bill, and aquaculture's a classic example, but there may be other ones
like aquaculture. From my p- you know, brief look, I
think it's the only one that is the odd one.
Um, and I've said about not wanting targeted goals,
for the reasons that I've stipulated.
I've put in PowerPoint slides so you can see the press
release where King Salmon saying they wanted a similar target
goals, to support and enable existing and new
aquaculture, including, including by implementing central
government aquacult- strategies or aquaculture.
Now, the,
this you need to be really careful of where the line gets
drawn. You know, you allow this, y- I mean, I
actually think you're gonna find, it's gonna open the door to an awful lot of
other industries wanting to do exactly the same.
Um, and my proposal of putting that marine coastal,
throwing things back into the planning cal- planning bill should actually
hopefully be quite help- helpful for, r-
rectifying that issue. I mean, everyone wants to have a good debate over
things, but if you're gonna find ways to stop people having debates, then I
actually think you, you know, democracy is much more challenged.
Um, last slide. This is the, natural
environment bill's goals. Now, interestingly, and I really think this
is terribly important, obviously the planning bill talks about
the importance of development and enjoyment, and that's sitting
in the national environment bill as a goal, in
A, I don't know if you can see it there.
Um,
and then you've got the, protect- protection and
enhancement in the, as a purpose of
the national environment bill. So what you, what you would expect to find
is alignment between the purpose of the bill and the goals
of the bill. And what they've done here is try to
create a little bridge
that sits
in the wrong place. So development and
enjoyment, think that they had use in development and
enjoyment, actually belongs in the planning
bill, and yet it's crept across into
the natural environment bill. And I think,
you know, being through legal things, everyone's gonna be defining what use
means, development, blah, blah, blah, for Africa.
So, so we wanna, we wanna actually find some sort of
mechanism so that these, I, I would call them-pure
so that you can have they, they shape it.
So we're sort of recommending there should be that goal to protect and
enhance the natural environment, might be blah blah blah.
But it actually, that should be the relationship from the
purpose to the goals. And if you are going
to put in the part of the
purpose of the a- of the planning bill into the natural environment
bill, you would actually do it by using, we've used the development and
enjoyment. In other words, you would be aligning it very
closely, otherwise you can have arguments over what's the difference
between development and enjoyment.
So you've gotta clunk those things very closely together so
that, they become defined. And I'll take questions.
And thank you very much for your
time.
Sorry, I was on, had myself on mute. Thank you, thank you, Wendy.
We have a question from Steve Abel.
Yeah, thank you Wendy. Um, do you think that combining the bills would
be, would help solve some of these challenges?
Yeah.
Or are we still gonna have the same challenges because there'll still be a section
dedicated to development and one dedicated to the natural
environment?
I, I, look, I th- I think that's a really good question.
I think you've got two options of frameworks.
So you've got the Geoffrey Palmer option, which I, I suppose as I'd say is the
all in one.
Mm.
And focusing on a shared purpose and goals right at the beginning, and
then letting the instruments play out.
This one I, I think if I was to simplify it, is trying to keep them
separate and then let the instruments do the
work. And,
that would work, I think.
Mm.
So is, is, is these two bills dead in my mind?
No. But boy, they need a lot of work in order for them
to work efficiently so the instruments work in practice.
Okay. Thank you.
Great. Look, just before we sign off, the, your slide
pack-
Yep
... are, are you able to supply that to us?
Yes, of course. Yep.
That, that would be great, thank you. It was very helpful.
Okay.
Really helpful.
Thank you.
Good suggestions.
Okay.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Um, great to s- see you today, and I hope farm, and, and,
farming goes well.
Oh, thank you.
Good to see you.
Cheers. Good to see you.
Thank you, Wendy. Bye-bye.
Bye-bye.
Thank you. Bye.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm just gonna hand over to Scott Willis now. I'm stepping out.
Yep. No worries, mate. Thank you.
Cheers.
Thanks, Steve.
Thank you.
Welcome back, Scott. Right now, we have Vector, I believe.
That explains why we have Scott.
G'day, right. See you. Thank you, Wendy.
Right then, we have Vector come through.
Uh, Amy, I believe you're leading the charge on this
one. Uh, welcome to the Environment Select
Committee subcommittee. Uh, we have 15 minutes with you
today. Um, feel free to go over, highlight, you, we have
your submission, please take it as read.
Feel free to highlight any issues that you, any particular issues, and leave time
for questions would be great. Thanks a lot, Amy. Fire away.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and members of the committee.
Uh, my name's Amy Gulliver, and I lead government relations for
Vector. Uh, joining online, I believe, are Vector's
chief public policy and regulatory officer, Mark Toner, and resource
management principal, Anthony Acres.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
Let me start with a simple proposition.
If New Zealand wants affordable and reliable electricity while we electrify
transport, industry, and homes, and while we build resilience to
storms and climate impacts, then our planning system needs to treat
electricity networks as the essential enabling infrastructure that they
are.
Activities of electricity networks are neither occasional nor
exceptional. They are so routine and so embedded in daily
life that when they are working well, they should largely happen in the
background. That is sensible planning.
It saves customers money, speeds up delivery, and allows communities to grow
without unnecessary friction. When the planning system does not keep
pace with that reality, the impacts show up quickly.
Delayed housing connections, slower upgrades, higher costs for
consumers, and reduced resilience for communities.
Vector's perspective comes from operating infrastructure that is present
everywhere, along streets, through suburbs, rural areas, and
sensitive environments. We have electricity assets on every
street in Auckland. Electricity distribution is
foundational to almost every home and business, and underpins many of the
development outcomes the planning system is trying to achieve.
Vector is New Zealand's largest electricity distributor.
We supply more than 632,000 electricity connections across
Auckland from Papakura to Wellsford through a network of nearly
20,000 kilometers of lines and cables.
Put simply, our network is longer than the distance from Auckland to
London. That scale matters. Thousands of
maintenance, replacement, upgrade, and repair activities occur every year just to
keep the system safe, reliable, and ready for growth and electrification.
Because that work is so routine and so widespread, even small amounts
of regulatory friction multiply rapidly across the network and
ultimately flow through to customers and communities.
Vector supports the government's intent to replace the RMA with a system that is
faster, clearer, and more consistent, fewer plans, fewer consents,
less duplication, and faster resolution.
Those objectives are absolutely the right direction for enabling infrastructure
delivery at the pace and scale that New Zealand needs.
Our submission focuses on a small number of targeted improvements to ensure the new
system delivers three outcomes that matter to New Zealanders:
safety, certainty, and system coherence.
Those outcomes are the lens that we ask the committee to apply.
Firstly, on national direction, we support the bill's top-down
architecture aimed at achieving national consistency.
But that architecture will only work efficiently if national direction is
sufficiently clear about how conflicts between different national instruments
are resolved.Electricity networks, because of their extensive and
linear nature, inevitably intersect with areas affected by other
national policy objectives, such as biodiversity or freshwater
protection. If those conflicts are not clearly resolved at the national
level, they tend to be re-litigated repeatedly through local plans and
consent processes. That creates delay, uncertainty, and
cost for infrastructure that communities rely on every day.
Our recommendation is therefore to ensure National Direction operates as a
genuinely cross-cutting framework that clearly resolves conflicts between
instruments and that recognizes the role of essential infrastructure
in supporting the land use outcomes the system is designed to
enable. Secondly, on the National Direction
pipeline. Electricity networks have historically been affected by
national policy created in other sectors without sufficient consideration
of operational requirements. Our submission points to the NPS
on urban development, where higher density outcomes have, in some
cases, resulted in buildings being constructed dangerously close to
overhead lines, contrary to the mandatory safe distance rules set out in
ECP thirty-four. That example illustrates why infrastructure
safety and operability need to be considered early in the national policy
process. We therefore recommend a requirement for practical
pre-notification engagement with core infrastructure providers when
national instruments are being developed.
Early input can identify drafting issues and unintended consequences
before policies are finalized. We also recommend allowing
sufficient submission time on the first tranche of national instruments,
extending the proposed twenty working days to forty, so stakeholders can
provide meaningful, meaningful input on complex system-wide
settings. Thirdly, on infrastructure
enablement in the planning system itself.
A recurring ins- issue under the current system has been routine
electricity network maintenance becoming caught in disproportionate planning
processes. This is exactly the kind of low impact,
well-understood work that should be able to proceed efficiently in the background
to keep the lights on. Current examples in Auckland show
why this matters. We currently have four consent applications
in with Auckland Council simply to replace end-of-life power
poles. These replacements are required for safety and reliability as
part of normal asset management. Because the new poles are slightly
more than ten percent taller than the existing poles and are located within a
height sensitive overlay, the activity is classified as
non-complying under the current plan and must be publicly
notified. The result is a clear mismatch between effects and
process, with the process likely to cost more than the work
itself. We have already committed about eighty thousand dollars in
consent deposits, and we expect an additional thirty to forty thousand
dollars in planning, technical, and engagement costs for these routine
replacements. In total, we expect the process will cost around a
hundred and twenty thousand dollars for works that themselves are worth roughly a
hundred thousand dollars.
Meanwhile, in the same area, Auckland Transport can install new light poles
up to twenty-five meters high as a permitted activity.
This example illustrates how routine infrastructure maintenance can become
trapped in administrative process despite having minimal environmental
effects, and it doesn't stop there.
In the same area as those just lodged pole consents, we yesterday
became aware of a customer connection job that will trigger another
publicly notified consent. That includes a replacement pole that
again breaches the ten percent height threshold and a new transformer in
the berm that breaches the nine hundred millimeter height limit for new
assets. These are standard low impact
network components. But because of how the thresholds
apply, that single connection is now at risk of being delayed
by several months, and that connection services a
twenty-six unit housing development.
So the practical outcome of this settings mismatch is not just extra process and
cost for the network operator, it is real delay for new homes getting
connected to electricity for works with negligible
effects. That is exactly the kind of outcome this reform is trying
to avoid. Our recommendation is therefore that the new system
ensures routine network maintenance and replacement can proceed as
permitted activities where effects are low, with public notification
reserved for genuinely significant impacts.
Finally, turning briefly to the Natural Environment Bill.
Essential infrastructure will inevitably interact with environmentally
constrained areas from time to time, and the system needs a clear pathway to
manage those effects without making critical infrastructure
impossible. The bill appropriately allows a consenting pathway
where infrastructure may interact with environmental limits.
However, our submission recommends removing the qualifier
"significant" from that pathway as it introduces
ambiguity and invites unnecessary dispute.
Finally, we raise a practical issue regarding long-lived infrastructure in the
coastal marine area, such as submarine electricity cables that
provide enduring services to communities.
Fixed maximum consent durations for these assets may create
unnecessary re-consenting costs without improving environmental
outcomes. To conclude, our submission is simply asking for a
planning system that functions as intended, faster, clearer, and
more consistent, while enabling the infrastructure New Zealand needs for housing
growth, electrification, economic development, and
resilience. If those settings are locked in now, the system will deliver
the certainty and speed Parliament is aiming for, while still protecting the
natural environment. Thank you very much for your time again, and we are happy to
take your questions.
Yeah. Thanks, Amy. Much thank you very much.
Uh, we have a question from Scott Willis.
Thank you, Amy. Um, great submission.
And, and, and I,
I guess I've got a couple of questions.
One is that the, you know, you know, make the point that our national
transmission and our low voltage networks are critical infrastructure
or, or, you know, could be considered lifeline infrastructure, but
w-weren't considered in the development of the, national
environmental standard for detached minor residential units.Can
you, can you, can you talk us through some of the problems that, that
emerged from that lack of engagement there?
And just to... I, I'm really keen to understand
how, how that's impacted the, the,
vector in particular, and then I... if I could follow up, that'd be great.
Sure.
Have we got my colleagues in Auckland online?
Mm-hmm.
Yes. Hopefully that, uh-
Great.
Yep.
Thank you for your question, Member Wallace.
Um, so the, the issues, and
I, I couldn't point you in the direction of a sort of specific example of,
an issue that that's caused as yet.
Obviously, it's just, just come out very recently.
But the issue that does cause is that the existing sort of lack of
visibility of, ECP34 specifically as the minimum
approach distance regulation is that the more these building
processes become deregulated, and the more sort of the marginal area that's used
by these, minor dwelling units, it means that the, the risk
just goes up, with fewer safeguards.
And so without having a safeguard as part of the minor dwelling,
unit NES, it basically just means that the
exposure is larger because, that's just another missed opportunity
to prevent buildings from being built too close to the overhead
lines.
Okay. And, and, Chair, if I could ask one more question.
Yeah. Fire away. Yep. Yep.
Thank you. Um, so you've al- you've also sought more
flexibility in altering national standards.
Um, that's really about, you know, I guess the-
there's, there might be changes that are no more minor in effect and to
address un- unintended consequences.
W- we know the industry's changing and developing, and we know that you want to be,
customer focused and all, and all of that, which is great.
But, we've also heard that giving, from other submitters, that
giving ministers so much discretion adds
uncertainty. So I, I wonder how we balance
that. You know, do we want to give all that discretion
but then things change and you don't know what will happen with a change of
government, you know? Is this gonna be beneficial?
So, so where do you s... how do you, how do you, how do you see that balance
working?
Uh, it's certainly a risk, and I think, there's probably a role for,
mechanisms like the planning tribunal to actually sort of build a bit of
an evidence base for those sorts of, matters and then potentially
there could be a function as part of the, tribunal to then push those up
to the government level to say, "Hey, look, there are these
quite niggly little, issues that we're dealing with that, from what we've
seen based on appeals to the tribunal from either the
council or submitters or members of the public, that these aspects
either are less well understood in their application or they're just
turning out to be sort of superfluous to, to the process and to the
outcomes intended." Um, so that could potentially be a way to sort of corral
those types of, those types of issues.
Um,
to be honest, when it gets past that level,
that's, there is, there is a lot of, a lot of work to be done in that space.
And, and I, I do agree there is, there is a risk that, it could be
exposed to those sort of, political uncertainties.
Mm.
I, I'll jump in here and ask a question if that's all right, Scott. Thank you.
Um, I just wanna go back. You highlighted, Amy, some, just some
really dumb stuff around pole heights.
Um, and then there's the submarine cable was another...
Uh, you've got a specific carve-out solution for that.
I'm sure the people on Waiheke would, would love to...
would be delighted to know that they might, lose their power because
of some resource consent process.
Um, but with for no gain or change to anybody.
So with the pole stuff, I'm not... I was just trying to work out what is, what was
your actual solution to that? The, the po- variation of pole
heights and, and why were those heights...
Was it just, are those heights varied simply because, what, modern
infrastructure higher for any particular reason?
'Cause-
So the proposed solution is ensuring that that routine network maintenance
can proceed as permitted activities where the effects are low, and
when public notification being reserved for those genuinely significant
impacts.
Yeah.
So, you know, as, as I've sort of outlined, our, our assets are just
everywhere.
Yeah.
And it should just be happening in the background.
It's so routine as to not be s-... I mean, that example of
those four poles in, Māngere Bridge, I believe,
we're paying $120,000 for the process and $100,000 for the
poles.
Yeah. It's just, yeah.
Um, a- and Anthony, maybe you could speak to the, the, the different heights
and the allowances.
Yeah. The-
Yeah. So the, the, the, so the, the crux of the issue is that we're, often
in these cases, especially for end of life poles, we're taking poles-
Yeah
... that tend to be shorter because, network standards for safety and so on
have changed-
Thanks. Um, thank you
... in the intervening years. So it's that modern equivalent of being caught up in
a, a pretty arbitrary, notification requirement.
Okay, that's good. And, and we're just about there. I'd just like to...
I hope that the upgrades to the Mangawhai end of the electric- of, of, of
your s- thing are being sorted out, 'cause I've got some grumpy
punters up there that would really appreciate more reliable
power.
We very much appreciate that, Mr. Chair, and we've got our chief engineer looking
at it.
Thank you.
We hope to come back to you with an update very shortly.
Very good. Thank you. And there's some very influential people out there with the
golf courses as well.
No, no, we're, we're aware of that. Thank you.
Okay.
We'll be in touch very shortly.
Thank you. Don't you shake your head, Scott. I took the opportunity.
Anyway, thank you very much for your, submission, Amy. I really appreciate it.
Anthony, thank you for your time. Um, all the best, and then, thank you very
much. Cheers.
Thanks. Thank you for your time. Thank you for having us.
No worries. Right.
Okay. Oh, Alan's back. Here we go. Scott needs to
leave. Very good. Righto, we now come to...
Who have we got now? Um-
Te Pumautanga o Te Arawa Trust.
Have we, we got them online?
Kia ora team. Can you see me?
There we go.
Can you hear me?
All right. G'day. G'day, g'day, g'day. Yeah. Thank you.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Welcome, welcome, welcome to the Environment Select Committee.
You do realise you're our penultimate, person, second
last, so you know. We-- Well, thank you very much.
Thank you for your time, really appreciate it.
Um, we've got 15 minutes of time with you. Uh, we have your submission.
Please feel free to take it as read, but feel free to highlight any key points if
you like, and then leave time for questions would be great. So fire away, thanks.
Kia ora, thank you. And look, apologies, the, the-- I've got some sound in here, so
I'm hoping, I'm hoping that you can hear me.
No, all good.
Okay, ka pai. Uh, nō reira, āe, koinei te mihi ake ki a koutou katoa
i te timata, Grant, a, i te komiti
whakahaere. Nō reira, tēnā koutou.
Um, thank you for allowing me to talk, to my oral submission this
afternoon, and
I, I, I will attempt to keep it, as succinct as possible.
Brilliant, mate. Thank you.
So, my name is Clarke Pirika, and I'm here to speak to my
oral submission on behalf of Te Pumautanga o Te Arawa Trust,
a post-settlement, governance entity that comprises
of 11 iwi and hapū of Te Arawa
and approximately 17,600, current
beneficiaries, of which I'm the chair.
Uh, I'm here today to voice a strenuous objection to
the Natural Environment Bill and the Planning Bill as it's
currently written.
So if you indulge me, I'd like to make a few pertinent
points in relation to our settlement with some commentary based, on
our written submission, and then I'll wrap it up with some
proposed amendments to, to these bills which I implore be
considered. So to kick this
off, my first point relates to the
protection of Te Tiriti o Waitangi and the settlement
integrity.
While the Crown seeks to modernize resource
management, these bills in their current
form represents a significant retreat from the
Crown's obligation under Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
For Te Pumautanga o Te Arawa, these bills are not just
administrative changes, they are a rollback of hard-won
rights. They're not just a policy
shift, they are a, a direct threat to the
settlements and rights our people have fought decades to
secure. The Crown is
attempting to legislate its way out of solemn promises made to our people,
and we won't stand idly by
while the settlement we ne-negotiated in good faith
is treated as a secondary consideration to a new
bureaucracy.
Now, the next point I'd like to talk to is what I term the partnership
gap.
Within our written submission, our first overarching concern is the language of the
bills.
Contrary to popular belief, Māori are partners of the
Crown, yet these bills relegate us to mere participants
in decision-making.
Mm.
This is a fundamental downgrade, and furthermore, there's no overarching
commitment to Te Tiriti. Unlike the Resource
Management Act, which at least required the Crown to take into account treaty
principles, these new bills offer no such
directive. This lack of a treaty
clause
creates a massive legal vacuum. Without
a clear requirement to give effect to Te Tiriti, the Crown risks
continuing a cycle of breaches
that undermine Māori tino rangatiratanga
and our role as tangata whenua with our res- within our respective
rohe.
Point number three I'd like to touch on
is what we see as a, a threat to our
settlements. The Resource Management Act
is not an isolated piece of law.
It's deeply integrated into our settlement
redress. Any change to the
RMA has an enduring impact on the guaranteed rights
of Te Pumautanga o Te Arawa.
Specifically, we're concerned with Section 9.
While it claims to protect settlement redress, it
includes the phrase "to the greatest extent
possible under these bills". This, we
believe, is a, is an escape hatch, a get out of
jail free card for the Crown. It suggests that the
provisions of these new bills
can override existing settlement acts.
The Crown cannot be allowed to use new legislation
to excuse itself from the promises it made in good faith
during settlement negotiations.
We refer you specifically to Part
4 of the Affiliate Te Arawa Iwi Hapū Deed of
Settlement. In that deed, the
Crown explicitly agreed to give effect to the settlement through
legislation that is s-satisfactory to both the
Crown and
Te Pumautanga o Te Arawa. By forcing
these bills
through without our consent, and by allowing these
bills to override settlement obligations,
we believe the Crown is in direct breach of its contract with the Te Arawa
affiliates
that negotiated our existing deed of settlement.
You, you can't use new law to denigrate old
promises.And the
final point, point I'd like to touch on relates to shifting
the burden of transition
and the two-year,
trap.
You know, le-let's talk about the cost of this transition.
The Crown
is asking us to do its work for
it. The Crown is asking us to spend our
own time and money on legal experts and technical advice
just to preserve rights we already
own. Under Section 9, we're
expected to review, negotiate, and redraft agreements
to ensure our rights aren't
lost. But where's the
resourcing?
The Crown has provided limited funding
that doesn't even begin to cover the specialist legal and technical advice
required to navigate this mess.
Furthermore, the two-year cap on, negotiations
is an insult. Time is our enemy
here, and time is,
is, is an asset that we've
already dealt with
to achieve this, this settlement.
So the Crown expects to renegotiate every settlement a-arrangement in the country
in 24 months. This is a setup for
failure. It creates a ticking clock where
if an agreement isn't reached, the Crown can simply shrug
its shoulders and move on,
leaving our rights in the dust. This isn't
engagement, it's a forced march.
In addition, Section 10 offers no clarity on
how equivalent effect will be maintained during this
period. We need clear
procedural mechanisms developed in partnership
to ensure we aren't left in a legal limbo.
Now, I've only really touched on some of the points from our written submission
that we believe need to be considered
while we have your ear.
So with that, we have some proposed amendments to remedy the
failings that I've alluded to in my oral
submission. Te Pumautanga o Te
Arawa submits the following essential
amendments. Number one,
removing the limiting language. Strike out to the
greatest extent possible from Sections 9 and
10. The law must state that settlements will be
upheld, irā kati. Full stop.
Number two,
ensure no diminishment.
Include a positive obligation on the Crown
to ensure that the effect of any settlement is not diminished by
this transition.
Number three, provide resourcing.
Mandate funding for PSGs to participate in these complex
negotiations. Number four,
fix the timeline.
Remove the arbitrary two-year cap.
Rights don't have an expiry date, and neither should the
Crown's obligation to protect them.
So fix the timeline to allow for meaningful
engagement.
So look, in closing, Te
Pumautanga o Te Arawa cannot support a regime that pri-prioritizes
administrative ease
over treaty justice.
The Crown is currently failing to u-uphold its
obligations. If you pass these bills in their current
form, you are not just, you are not just reforming the
RMA, you are committing a fresh breach of Te
Tiriti. The Te Arawa affiliates negotiated
in good faith.
We expect the Crown to do the same.
We do not expect a same or equivalent effect
that is determined solely by the Crown.
We ask this select committee
to uphold the integrity of our settlements and ensure that any
new, environment framework begins with a true
partnership, not a step backward.
We demand a partnership that respects the sanctity of our
settlement. Uh, ka tíra i konei, e te
tiamana, e te komiti whakahaere. Uh, nei rā
anō, te mihi atu ki a koutou. Uh, nō
reira, tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, o tērā, tēnā
tātou. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I appreciate your, presentation.
Thank you very much, and Lan Pham has a question.
Tēnā koe, Matua Clark.
Kia ora.
Thank you so much for that very clear submission.
Um,
one thing that we've been trying to get a,
a, I guess, understanding of as a committee is
in the lead up to these bills
actually, you know, being notified and, and
being open for submissions, what was your
engagement, with officials prior
to that for Te Arawa Trust?
Um, so we were, engaged,
with, MFE. So, we, we did
speak, I guess our truth in terms
of,
what these bills mean to us and the potential impact.
So we have had discussions with, our, our office
has had discussions with, the Ministry for the Environment.
Um, so that has happened, which I do
appreciate.Um,
I, I, I think some of
our leanings, have kind of
not been included in, you know, in what we currently have,
in terms of the two bills that are,
are before us at the moment.
Mm. Thank you. Can I ask another question, Chair?
Yes, sure. Fire away, love.
Um, 'cause that is, I guess, the feedback that we've often
heard, particularly from, iwi, hapū
and settlement groups. Um, they've had some form of
engagement, often limited, but then it hasn't
translated into changes to the bills so far.
What hope do you have for, for example, this
two-year timeline that the bill sets out to
kind of resolve, settlement
issues that, I guess, the, your voice will be
heard in that timeframe?
I, I guess the reality for us is
if,
if this two-year,
cap is binding, and it's not gonna move,
then
it kind of makes sense that, extra resourcing
is, is accorded us
so that we can meet that, that really tight, tight
timeframe.
Um, and to be honest, even if we are fully resourced, I
think it'll still be a struggle to, meet that
two-year, cap because we're
one of
however many other settlements are already in play.
So,
yeah, it, it, it is, it is a concern.
It's still a concern.
Ngā mihi.
Yep.
Well, look, thank you very much, Clark. That was great.
Um, really much appreciate your presentation.
Um, we've, come to the end of our, of your time, so thank you very
much once again. Appreciate it very much, and have a, have a great day.
Cheers. Thank you.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. And we come to our final,
our final submitter, Palmerston North City Council.
Uh, Chair-
I'm so pleased. Um, you don't know how pleased we all are to see this submission.
'Cause it is the last one of the day, so it's been- ...
oh, no, three days in a row, I might point out.
Um, so no, th- look, seriously, thank you very much.
Uh, really, really appreciate you, committing, coming in today to submit to
us. We have your submission. Please feel free to take it as read, but we
would, value any, opening comments to summarize key
points, and we have 15 minutes of your time, and go for your life.
Thank you.
Uh, kia ora Chair, and thank you for hearing us, and, we'll, we'll try
and make it worth waiting for. Uh, so we'll just
introduce ourselves first. I'm Lorna Johnson.
I'm an elected member at Palmerston North City Council and an RMA
commissioner.
Uh, kia ora koutou. Uh, David Murphy, uh General Manager of Strategic
Planning at Palmerston North City Council.
Good afternoon, everyone. Uh, Jono Ferguson-Pike, City Planning Manager at
Palmerston North City Council.
Yeah, so just, to introduce our comments, we're
grateful for the opportunity to comment on the bill, and we're, we're primarily
focused on the planning bill because that's relevant to our core statutory planning
functions. And, we support the overall
direction of the reforms. You know, we agree that the goal of a more
integrated and future focused system is a good one, and that the current
system isn't delivering outcomes, as expected.
So, you know, we're broadly supportive of the overall direction of reform,
but there are some particular, areas that we want to
comment on, five in fact. Uh, the first one is,
the centralization of power. So we note that the bill gives the minister much
greater control over local planning decisions, which will
shift planning away from local control to centralized
standardized direction and reduce the influence of both locally
elected representatives and local communities in shaping plans.
We are concerned about that because, we've had a number of
instances here where,
there's been, particular environments, I'm particularly thinking of a recent
plan at Kairere where the, there were lots of,
though it would technically be a greenfield, plan, there
were, lots of gullies in the, area for,
rezoning, and it needed a, a particularly,
careful look at, the effects of storm water and so on.
So we're a bit concerned about centralized direction not being able
to account for local differences.
Um, and in particular I would say, as an elected member, I'm concerned that
local communities will have less of a voice in shaping plans.
Um, and we're also worried that if the minister has a large amount of
control, that there may be, sort of
flip-flopping between governments where there's one direction for three years, and
then perhaps another direction for the next three, which we think will not,
play well with local developers, or anyone else really
trying to get certainty about development.
Over to you, David.
Thank you, Lorna. Yeah, just, just so I guess to build on those points that,
Councilor Johnson ha- has just made, I mean, legislation such
as this should really be enduring, and, and be able to
survive, changes in government and changes in minister.
And, and while we understand that, there is a need, at times for national
direction, and that's a, a core part of this government's, a-
approach, I think that needs to be balanced, as, as Councilor Johnson said.
The idea that, a new government or a new minister has a, a different
take on a particular issue, will, will, will
trigger, under this system, a nationwide
response to that national direction across all the regional spatial
plans and plans. So, while national direction
is important, that needs to be, I guess tempered, and we'd like to see a more
enduring approach-Uh, within the legislation.
I think just to touch on, again, the points that Councillor Johnson made around the
need for, local responses. Uh, you know,
again, we support standardization of a number of planning provisions
a-across the country. Uh, but I, I don't say this lightly, I think
it's, it's somewhat naive to kind of think that a standard set of
provisions developed out of Wellington are going to be able to
accommodate and address really tricky local issues that have been
resolved, through, the community, resource
users, the council, a-and, and, and, and being put in place.
So you'll know that the Manawatū and Palmerston North has, for instance, has
received a lot of wind farm development over the last twenty years.
That's been a, you know, a real positive from a renewable energy perspective,
but there's been a lot of concern and angst within the community about certain
things. So we have a, we have a really tailored, response at the moment that
deals with upgrades and renewals, protects landscape,
deals with noise. Um, and that, that's been something that's been negotiated
through the community with, the, the renewable energy generators and the
council. And, you know, I, I struggle to see how those types of
issues are gonna be resolved, through standardized, provisions.
So, on that point, I'll, I'll hand over to, Jono, who's gonna talk
about some, time framing resourcing concerns that we have.
Yeah, thanks, David. Um, hi, everyone.
Yeah, look, really what I wanna talk about is sort of
implementation time frames, resourcing and cost.
Um, no doubt you've, you've heard about a lot of those, those issues,
over the last few days. But obviously the bill requires councils
to, to run the current RMA system while simultaneously preparing
for the, transition to a new one.
Um,
and obviously, that, that is something that we would
l-like you to reconsider in terms of some of the time frames around that.
We, we have, a very big work program
here at Palmerston City. Um,
we have a lot of growth plan changes, probably of...
I've been in this, managing in this area for the last twenty-three
years. We've never had so many plan changes to rezone land in the last
twenty-three years as we do now. So we have a huge RMA work
program that we're going to have to balance and resource at the same time as
transitioning to this new system.
Um, and the tr- the time frame that is
proposed obviously is incredibly ambitious, and we would
request a reconsideration of that transition, in light
of, some of the big work, workloads that we're currently carrying through the
current system. But also recognizing that in a, in a
region like the Manawatū Whanganui area, there, there is a
broad, um... there's big variability and capability to
manage, that transition as well.
And, and as one of the bigger councils, you know, we'll be in a position of having
to, at times, support smaller councils at the same
time as, managing a, an existing high workload.
Um, the other thing we'd like, the committee to, to, to
consider also is, is whether, you know,
there, there, there really needs to be some thought around, how
councils, will fund additional costs associated with
r- with transition. Um, we, you know,
obviously there's a, some rates capping legislation that has been
proposed, and, while we recognize in the
long term that the, the, the new regime will,
will, reduce the number of consents and the, the time spent on,
on developing plan changes, in the medium term
transition, you know, we're looking at our budgets and
seeing, quite extensive additional cost to rate payers in, in,
in, in that transition period. So, if you could
just, just give some consideration to that, that would be much
appreciated. Um, just the last thing from me, just consideration of climate
change. We note that, the bill largely admits,
recognition of climate change,
and that there's a, an absence of climate related goal within that,
legislation. Um, so we just ask that, a goal,
be added to the bill to ensure the new system adequately responds to increasing
natural hazards risk. Um,
I'll hand over to you, David.
Thanks, Jono. Just our, our last key point, and hopefully there's a bit of time for
any, questions you may have at the end, is regarding the regulatory relief
regime. Um, you know, this is a, a real concern,
to us. Um, particularly, you know, building on the point that, Jono just
made around pending rates caps and, and things like that.
The ability for councils to provide regulatory relief,
and cover the cost of regulation, I think is, blatantly actually just really
unrealistic. And it's, it's not, uh...
It, it's also not consistent with the, the, the, the rules that the government
applies to itself, you know. I, I was just thinking of some, some regulation that
the government undertakes, for instance, around marine protection
areas or regula- regulation of the fisheries,
sector. Um, as far as I'm aware, there are, you know,
regulatory relief, programs for that type of regulation that government
undertakes on behalf of the country, for those types of sectors.
So to ask councils, to provide that sort of relief when it's not something
government does itself is, is really unfair, and it's another
passing down of costs from Wellington to,
local government, which has been a long list and consistent pattern,
of successive governments for a long period of time.
And lastly, on the regulatory relief regime, while there'll be a
new regional plan developed, no single
planning document ever, completely ignores the things that,
preceded it. So the point I would make regarding regulatory relief
is if there is regulation, controls governing things like
landscape, heritage, indigenous biodiversity in these new
plans, which is in the outcomes and expected of
councils, within the legislation, a lot of those
protections will be building on protections that are already in
place.Uh, so there are already landscape protection areas,
indigenous protection, heritage protection and plans that are
accepted and have been accepted by the community, have been through planning
processes, environment court, those sorts of things.
Uh, and there is not regulatory relief for them.
So the idea that we're gonna provide regulatory relief for
protection of environmental, at, at, you
know, attributes, when those are already in place,
seems, yeah, absurd, to be honest.
Um, and, and I don't say that lightly.
So, and, and really unfair on local government and
communities. So I will leave it there, and happy to answer any questions you
may have.
Righto. Thank you. We have a question from Helen White.
Hi. Thank you, for your submission.
Um, I'm based in Mount Albert, so I'm seeing this in an
Auckland context. But one of the things that I'm really concerned
about is that we may have a real backlash from the
community because they simply lose confidence
in what we're doing because it... They know their local
area. So I've got areas where they're flooding,
and they're, they're very nuanced where that is
happening, and I've got a lot of worry
about losing control of
community. Um, and so I wanted to ask you
about that. How do you feel about
the risk of backlash, which I've, I've
heard and read about overseas? Communities that do this
locally tend to have sustained
development, but communities that do this in a
central way tend to have giant backlashes.
Yeah. I mean, I think you're absolutely right.
Um, as David mentioned before, you know, most of,
the plans and the changes that we've made up till now have had substantial
local community input, as well as local council input, and
if we're going to be given centralized plans without councils working in
partnership with government and without much ability, I mean, I believe there is a,
a special route, but it has to go through the minister to get a special,
provision. Um, I don't think we're, we're gonna get as much buy-in
from local community, and I don't...
Well, I, I doubt whether those plans are gonna be fit for purpose, for
specific, natural hazards, for
specific biodiversity areas, et cetera.
So don't know if you want to add to that, David?
Yeah. I, I, I, I agree with your point and, and Councillor Johnson's,
response. I guess what I would say, in, in the broad sense, communities as
well, it's not just local communities in terms of residents and community
groups. Resource users across the country have fought
really, really hard for a number of provisions that exist within plans across the
country.
Mm.
And if those, if those outcomes are not reflected in the standard
provisions developed out, out of Wellington, the likes of energy
companies, the likes of, you know, transmission, you
know, resource users, Waka Kotahi, whoever it is, they've fought for, a
lot of controls that exist within plans, and they will expect
them, to come through in, in these, these
plans.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Well, actually, I'll just quickly jump in a, a quick question
before I go to Lan. Um, I'd just like, your comments around
regulatory relief. I'd just like...
See, the challenge as I see it is where,
you get the absurd situation, where we had in the F-
Northland District Council, where they, they put these blanket
SNAs all over the place, really stirred up everybody, and
backed down, and backed down on the finish, and there was...
And part of the reason, it was gonna really impact on people's ability to do what
they normally do in their, on, with their land.
So how do you see for... What is the solution to that
where, you know, s-some, you know, there is genuine impact on
individual landowners?
Yeah. Look, I mean, that's a r-a really good example, and SNAs have been
incredibly controversial a-across the country.
I guess what I would say is, has there's been, some,
you know, there's always examples of, of...
And I don't want to say this particular example's poor practice, but, you know,
protecting those types of, those types
of, pieces of the environment, you know, signi-
requires a huge amount of good quality information, and it
requires a careful conversation with landowners about what the best
response is. Typically, I think where those processes have gone poorly, and it
sounds like this one did, is it... My best guess is it'll be based on
poor information, poor, poor engagement, and poor consultation.
So but that's an example, I guess, of the costs.
Uh, you know, a lot of councils don't have the time and resources to get good
quality information on SNAs, so we end up with a blanket type of approach 'cause
it's quicker and easier, and communities, respond as a
result. So I don't think regulatory relief will solve that problem.
I think it's more... Actually, some of the other changes that you're, you're
proposing, which is a more standardized approach, to
provisions, is probably likely to benefit those types of
examples.
Thank you very much. And we have time for one quick question, Lan. Last question.
Not gonna go too long. Go for it. Your last one.
Tena koutou. Thank you. Uh, well, I'll have to go to the big picture then
instead of detail, because, you know, you've
raised such serious concerns and implications in
your submission, as has many people that we've heard today and
throughout the, last few weeks.
And one comment that stuck in my mind, was actually
from Engineering New Zealand, who said, you know, it's one
thing to have a system of what people perceive to be a
system of uncertainty, but actually we may be
moving to a system of greater uncertainty.
So do you have any comments for the committee around, you
know, potentially just taking some more
time-
Yes
... instead of sort of hashing something out
i-in the next few months literally, and then putting it
on you. Um, you know, any comments around that for the committee
before we close the hearings? Thank you.
Absolutely. I think more time is required to, to get this
right because, you know, we, I think we all agree that, you know, there's
potential here to make good improvements to the planning system, but,
you know, legislate in haste, repent at leisure, is what I would
say.
Yeah. I, I agree with that. I guess the, what I, what I would add is any new system
will create uncertainty, so I think we need to acknowledge that any new system will
be, will have a level of uncertainty associated with it.
Uh, so a bit more time getting the legislation correct is one thing, but I
think the point Jono made earlier about the implementation timeframes around the
spatial plan and the standardized provisions and the rollout of
those, to an extent, that's almost gonna be more critical than the
legislation because that's where the rubber meets the road.
So yes, take some more time getting the legislation right, but provide some
really realistic timeframes for the standard provisions, the spatial plans,
all those things to roll out. I mean, the idea that the Ministry for the
Environment or the new entity, I'm not sure what it's gonna be called, is gonna
create standard rules for the whole country in the space of, I
think 12 to 15 months, when these plans have
taken six to seven, eight years of negotiation at a local level to play out
is just unrealistic.
Look, thank you. Look, hey, we've reached time. Thank you very much.
Really appreciate yours and your very fulsome submission.
Uh, thank you, and, that's great, and have a great day down there in Palmerston
North. Cheers.
Okay. See you.
Cheers. Thank you for your time